Genetically Modified Cotton
Please activate Javascript. Without Javascript activated some functions do not work.
News/Current Affairs
News Messages
Stories
Country Reports
Grocery Shopping
Fruit and Vegetables
Crops and Cereals
Processed Foods
Ingredients and Additives
Agri-Biotechnology
Breeding Aims
GMO Planting
Field Trials
Sustainability
GMO Database
Safety
Environmental Safety
Human Health
Regulation
Regulatory Process
Labelling
Coexistence
Service
Feb 7, 2017
|
3:34 pm
Fruit and VegetablesCrops and CerealsProcessed FoodsIngredients and AdditivesSite Search
Searches all ofGMO-Compass in an instant
Stakeholder input wanted: survey on research needs for assessing GMO
impacts
Shaping the Future of GMO Research
Stakeholder with interests in the risk and/or benefit assessment of
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) are invited to take part in an online
survey.
The aim of this survey is to identify which research needs should be
prioritised, thereby contributing to the commissioning of research on the
health, environment and economic impacts of GMOs.
The survey will close on 15th July 2015.
More information and access to the online surveyGlossaryNew on GMO-CompassNew database entriesImprint
The setting-up of this website was financially
supported by the European
Union within the European Commissions Sixth Framework Programme from
1 January 2005 until 28 February 2007.
The European Commission and other EU agencies are not responsible for the content.
See whats what.
The GMO Food Database. You want to know for which food products or plants gene technology plays a role?
Then enter here the name of a plant, foodstuff, ingredient or additive:
Database search
All database entries in overview:
Plants
Foodstuffs
Ingredients and additives
Additives according to E numbers
Enzymes
Please note that the GMO Compass Database currently is being expanded and updated. Please check back for new entries. Newsletter
Sign up to receive regular updates on GMfood quality and safety.
To change or cancel your subscription, please enter your email above.Contact
Comments, suggestions or questions?
Please contact us at info@gmo-compass.org
Change font size
1
2
3
Crops
Cotton
Cotton is more than just a fibre for textiles. It isalso an important source of raw materialsusedin animal feed and for various processed food ingredients. Many countries are now growing genetically modified cotton. In China, GM cotton could drasticallyreduce pesticide use.
Cotton fibresused in textiles around the world come from theseed hairs of a plant known as Gossypium hirsutum. Cotton, which is cultivated on five continents, develops in closed, green capsules known as bolls that burst open when ripe, revealing the white, fluffy fibres.
A bollworm on a cotton boll. Insect pests are aproblem for cotton.
Bt cotton is an alternative to chemical insecticides.
After harvest, the fibres must be separated from the seeds. The protein- and oil-rich seeds can be processed into various side-products that are used in food and feed:
Cottonseed oil is a high-value cooking or frying oil and is sometimes used to make margarine. The oil is also a source of vitaminE (tocopherol).
Protein-rich cottonseed meal is mostly used as animal feed. Some, however, is used for protein preparations and cottonseed milk.
Leftover fibres that are too short to be spun into textiles consist almost completely of cellulose and can be used as food additives. Cellulose (E 460) and methylcellulose (E 461) can be used as thickeners, stabilisers, emulsifiers, or fillers.
Bt cotton cultivation in many countries
GM cotton has become widespread, covering a total of15 million hectares in 2007,
or 43 percent of the world's cotton. Most GM cotton is grown in India and the US, but it can also be found in
China, Argentina, South Africa, Australia, Mexico, and Columbia. The GM cultivars grown today are resistant to herbicides orinsect pests.
More than half (68%) of China's cotton production is genetically modified to produce a substance(Bt toxin) that protects it against insect pests. A few types of caterpillars are especially problematic because they bore into cotton bolls reducing yield and compromisingquality. Cotton used to be protected from insects by repeated pesticide applications. Bt cotton has now enabled Chinesefarmers to dramatically reduce pesticide use.
The production of GM cotton has not yet been approved in the EU. Applications have been submitted, but a decision is still pending. Several lines of GM cotton have been approved in the EU, but only for use as food and feed.
See also on GMO-Compass:
GMO Cultivation Area
GMO Food Database: Cotton
An EU Research Project
What are the risks of growing GM crops?
What are the benefits?
Numerous studies have addressed the potential impacts of genetically modified (GM) plants. Yet the existing evidence on the effects of GM plants is often contradictory and the quality of scientific research varies widely.
Therefore, the GRACE project will establish new tools for assessing the quality of existing studies and
will conduct comprehensive reviews to identify health, environmental and
socio-economic impacts of GM plants.
More
information
Videos:
GMO Soybeans & Sustainability
Less soil erosion and fuel consumption: herbicide tolerant soybeans are promoting sustainable cultivation methods.
Glyphosate in European agriculture
Interview with a farmer
Glyphosate containing herbicides are not
only used in fields with GM crops. They also allow conventional farmers to sow
directly into stubble fields without ploughing. Glyphosate has replaced
mechanical weed control in many crops and has had an important impact on
agricultural practices and crop yields in Europe over the past few decades.
Source:
European Glyphosate Task Force
Crops and Cereals
Gm Plants: Cultivation and Futur Projects
Soybeans
Maize
Rape Seed
Cotton
Sugar beet
Wheat
Potato
Rice
GM Cotton and the Environment
GM plants: Global cultivation area
Crop specific safety concerns: Cotton
Pest resistant crops: The Bt conceptBreeding aims
Herbicide Resistance
Pest Resistance
Disease Resistance
Plants with Altered Composition
Pharming
Stress Resistance
Elimination of Pollutants
December 4, 2008
 2017 by GMO Compass. All rights reserved. | Imprint | website created by webmotive