Genetically Modified Foods | Natural Society
Weight Loss
Cold & Flu
GMOs
Monsanto
Fitness
Cancer
Positive News
Home
News
Everyday health
Current events
Good News
GMOs
Nutrition
Newsletter
About Natural Society
Contact
Shop
Genetically Modified Foods
Genetically modified foods are made upof organisms (known as GMOs for genetically modified organisms) which have been genetically altered for improvement. Biotechnology giant Monsanto is the primary maker of genetically modified seeds, responsible for 90 percent of the genetically engineered seed on the United States market.
The touted reasons for genetically modifying foods vary from making a fruit larger and seedless to resisting pesticides, herbicides, and insecticides. Millions of dollars are invested in this bioengineering process annually by many, withBill Gatesmost notably investing into Monsanto with 500,000 shares. But are GMO foods really the solution to humanitys problems, or are they negatively affecting virtually all life on planet earth?
Genetically modified foods have been proven not only to be unhealthy, but also deadly. Onereview of 19 studiesshowed that with the consumption of genetically modified foods comes significant organ disruptions, especially in the liver and kidneys. Whats more, however, is that the damage posed by Monsantos GMO creations extend even further than public health. In fact, they threaten the environment as a whole. This is perhaps the most concerning effect of GMOs.
Monsanto has created GMO crops that contain something known as Bt, which is a toxin incorporated into the crops with the intention of killing off insects. The usage of the Bt biopesticide within these GMO crops, however, has actually led to mutant insect populations which are directly resistant to the biopesticide. Reports state that at least 8 insect populations have developed resistance,with 2 populations resistant to Bt sprays and at least 6 species resistant to Bt crops as a whole. As a result, farmers must spray even more pesticides!
Beyond GM seeds and the Bt pesticide, Monsanto is also the creator of the best-selling herbicide Roundup. The usage of Roundup has spawned over 120 million hectacres of herbicide-resistant superweeds that have destroyed the farmland in which they reside. In addition, much of the soil has also been damaged. Even in the face of these statistics, Monsanto continues to disregard any and all warning signs.
Genetically modified foods present a very real threat to the genetic integrity of both humankind and the environment, and require vigorous longterm research before being unleashed on the public. That is why nations like Peru, France, and Hungary are taking action against Monsanto and GMOs over legitimate health concerns.
Newsletter
Follow
Natural Society
Essential Stories
Reinventing the Wheel: Nestle Reformulates Sugar
Julie Fidler
December 8, 2016
Is the Soda Industry Hiding Health Risks of Drinking Soda?
Julie Fidler
December 7, 2016
First Human Injected with Controversial Genetically Modified Genes
Julie Fidler
December 1, 2016
Congress Prepares to Vote on Bill That Would Speed up Drug Approval
Julie Fidler
November 30, 2016
Incoming Trump Administration is Shaping up to be Very Pro-GMO
Julie Fidler
November 29, 2016
Could Turmeric be a Solid Natural Solution for Alzheimers?
Alexandra Preston
November 17, 2016
Check out Natural Society's Polls on LockerDome on LockerDome
Viral Stories
Home Remedies for Hemorrhoids  6 Natural Treatments
16 Magnesium Deficiency Symptoms  Signs of Low Magnesium Levels
Health Benefits of Dates  Promoting Heart, Brain, and Digestive Health
Top 10 Worst GMO Foods for Your GMO Foods List
10 Health Benefits of Black Seed (Nigella Sativa)  Part 1
The Numbers on Plastic Bottles: What do Plastic Recycling Symbols Mean?
Home
About Natural Society
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Advertise
Newsletter
Work with Us
Contact
2017 Natural Society. Allrights reserved.
Disclaimer | Privacy Policy