GMOs news, articles and information:
HomeAbout NaturalNewsContact UsWrite for NaturalNewsMedia InfoAdvertise with Natural News
GMOs news, articles and information:
Tweet
Pin It
Boycott of Kellogg's, maker of processed junk foods made with GMOs, expands to massive reader base of Breitbart.com12/1/2016 - Breitbart.com, with a massive reader base of 45 million fans, has just announced a massive boycott of all Kellogg's brands.
It's not over GMOs, however. Breitbart.com doesn't focus on food, herbicides or genetic engineering. Their focus is politics, and over the last two years, they've risen to become...If you believe in liberty and freedom, stop buying emergency food products made with Monsanto ingredients11/30/2016 - One of the biggest threats that society currently faces is the very real prospect of a massive food system collapse precipitated by chemical overuse and the spread of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs). And ironically enough, many storable survival food kits designed to help mitigate an emergency...Fracking, GMOs, vaccines and President Trump: How Natural News plans to advocate for natural medicine, clean food and a clean environment during the Trump administration11/20/2016 - You may not know it yet, but in electing Donald Trump our next President, we all dodged a huge bullet. Hillary Clinton is a seething, evil criminal who despises the independent media. Had she attained the presidency, she would have shut down Natural News and imprisoned all the leaders of the alternative...Taiwan: 97% of soybeans are now GMO11/6/2016 - The Taiwanese Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently announced that the country's new tracking codes have allowed it to determine for the first time that 97 percent of soybeans imported into Taiwan come from genetically modified organisms (GMOs).
In July, the Taiwanese FDA implemented new commodity...Soylent food bars 'proudly made with GMOs' causing stomach problems, vomiting and diarrhea10/25/2016 - The Oregon-based Soylent company, which proudly manufactures a full line of genetically-modified beverages, powders and "food" bars, has recalled every single one of its "Soylent Bar" meal replacement products, following a stream of complaints from consumers who say they experienced horrific stomach...Hillary's ties to Monsanto mean more GMOs, less transparency in labeling10/16/2016 - This year's choice of presidential candidates being offered by the two major political parties could not be more unorthodox, and clearly there are things about both of them not to like.
GOP presidential nominee Donald J. Trump is lewd, has no filter whatsoever and prone to saying (and tweeting) whatever...India's organic rice success story proves that GMOs are unnecessary9/29/2016 - One of the biggest  but most easily debunked  lies we've been told about GM agriculture is that the technology is necessary to feed a steadily increasing world population.
Monsanto and other GM agriculture companies would like for us to believe that their methods increase crop yields...Has your DNA been altered by GMOs?9/26/2016 - If you are eating genetically modified foods  including essentially any product containing corn or soy that has not been certified organic or free from genetically modified organisms (GMOs)  the modified genes in those GMOs might be negatively influencing your body's own DNA.
The American...GMO contamination of food increasingly disrupts international trade9/16/2016 - Genetically modified organisms are a covert science experiment going on in the environment, in people and all around the world, subjecting the unaware masses to lab-invented foods. While GMOs can be detected in a country's imports, there is little effort done to label these ingredients on food product...Synthetic biology is the new GMO - engineered food ingredients arriving this year9/8/2016 - With genetically modified organisms (GMOs) quickly approaching a point of saturation in the conventional food supply, the genetic butchers responsible for unleashing things like Roundup Ready soybeans are getting ready to unveil the next phase of their predatory agricultural conquest -- synthetic biology.
A...Public trust in Whole Foods shattered after exposure of artificial ingredients and unlabeled GMOs8/19/2016 - The public's trust in Whole Foods took a serious dive after the chain was exposed for selling food with artificial ingredients and unlabeled GMOs, and it appears that the store's new offerings are not going to be enough to win people back.
The Whole Foods in Boulder, Colorado, has launched an all-vegan...Non-GM crops will feed the world; GMOs decrease yield, enslave farmers and destroy the environment8/15/2016 - The dominance of GMOs in agriculture today is not based on their free market success. GMOs are prevalent because governments around the world subsidize these seeds, forcing small holders to introduce them. In this way, governments routinely assist biotech corporations in the takeover of a nations' agriculture...Green Party candidate Jill Stein promises to label GMOs, end industry influence over regulatory agencies if elected president8/4/2016 - A growing number of Americans are feeling discomforted by the lack of choices for president, increasing the appeal of third party candidates. Bernie Sanders supporters, in particular, are feeling the burn after the purported anti-establishment nominee endorsed establishment queen Hillary Clinton. As...President Obama signs bill that forever exempts Big Food from placing GMO labels on food packages8/2/2016 - While Americans were bustling about in preparation for their weekend, President Barack Obama quietly signed a bill late Friday afternoon that will likely forever keep people in the dark about the presence of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in their food.
Drafted by Senate Agriculture Chairman...Foods gene-edited to withstand noxious herbicides are being labeled non-GMO7/20/2016 - The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) recently announced that it will not regulate the entire forthcoming generation of genetically modified organisms (GMOs), allowing new genetically engineered (GE) foods to enter the food supply without any testing or permitting process. This "free pass" by the...BETRAYED! Whole Foods and the Organic Trade Association just plowed right through American food consumers like the terrorist truck rampage in France (op ed)7/15/2016 - By now we're all sadly aware of the terror atrocity in Nice, France that took the lives of at least 80 people. The attack was insane and horrific, and my prayers go out to all those affected by the senseless violence. Yet it isn't just ISIS terrorists who are destroying lives in our world, and it's...Totally hijacked by Big Food: Organic Trade Association turns against GMO labeling7/15/2016 - A number of farmer and consumer advocacy groups are breaking ties with the influential Organic Trade Association (OTA), after it was discovered that the membership-based organization, which represents the entire organic industry in both Canada and the United States, sold out to Big Agribusiness by extending...Why are progressives against GMOs and pesticides, but supportive of mass vaccination and Big Government's global warming agenda?7/14/2016 - Americans who claim "progressive" as their political mantle are an odd bunch. Some would say they are like a mystery wrapped in an enigma surrounded by a riddle. And they tend to be a little hypocritical in their thinking.
Take the issue of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and mass vaccination....Top 7 diseases, disorders, and syndromes brought on and EXACERBATED by GMOs, antibiotics, and a slew of toxic vaccinations7/12/2016 - The majority of diseases and disorders that exist in the world today are either of the contagious, infectious kind or the type that are brought on by consuming carcinogens and neurotoxins. Regarding the latter and the term "consuming," we are describing anything toxic in food, beverages, vaccines, or...99 percent of GMOs could be EXCLUDED from labeling under newly proposed law7/5/2016 - There's a new GMO labeling bill moving through Congress that, contrary to what its backers claim it to be, is nothing more than a covert anti-labeling bill that threatens to undo many years' worth of hard work by true GMO labeling advocates pushing for meaningful reform in this important area of food...Iowa farmer exposes complete failure of GMOs, blasts Roundup Ready crops for creating superweeds and superbugs that kill vital insects and birds7/5/2016 - The media is notorious for showcasing genetic engineering as some kind of miracle for food production, but what do actual farmers think of the technology? In a scathing op-ed piece published in The Des Moines Register, Iowa farmer George Naylor holds nothing back in debunking many of the common myths...Midwestern farmer warns: GMOs have drained BILLIONS of dollars from rural economies while monopolizing agriculture6/30/2016 - George Naylor, a farmer and board member of the Center for Food Safety and the Non-GMO Project, has cultivated corn and soybeans on his family farm near Churdan, Iowa, since 1976. Like many others, George made the decision never to raise genetically modified (GM) crops, and has been encouraging other...Exposed Monsanto shill Kevin Folta partners with discredited Forbes.com to deceive public about GMO cancer link6/20/2016 - On June 1, the discredited biotech puppet publication Forbes.com published an article entitled "Why GMOs Don't Cause Cancer," by Michael Stebbins. Stebbins is a spokesperson for the GMO industry front group GMO Answers, and she works for its parent organization, the Council for Biotechnology Information.
The...Health Ranger warns: Popular survival foods are loaded with chemical ingredients that promote DEATH... MSG, GMOs, pesticides and more6/20/2016 - It's time the survival food industry had a wakeup call. Nearly all the popular survival food sold today is loaded with GMOs, MSG and chemical pesticides, and this fact is obvious from looking at their ingredients labels.
Eating survival food in an emergency shouldn't mean poisoning yourself with...Eerie parallels between Nazi scientists and modern GMO scientists6/15/2016 - The absolutely horrific war crimes that took place during World War II against prisoners both young and old in the Nazi death camps are often relegated to the dustbin of history, with the implication that such inhumane experimentation on human beings could never possibly happen again in today's modern,...Big Biotech's big lie: National sciences group concludes GMOs do not increase crop production6/8/2016 - Over the years, genetically modified crops have been a controversial topic of intense global debate. While proponents claim that GMOs are safe and needed to feed our burgeoning population, health and environmental groups are concerned about the lack of long-term testing on the impact of GMOs on the...How GMO agriculture unleashed a dangerous wave of chemically-resistant superweeds and pests... Nearly all promises of GM crops revealed as FAILURES6/2/2016 - A new landmark study has refuted many of the claims of the genetically modified organism (GMO) industry, demonstrating that many of the promises of GMO agriculture remain unfulfilled decades later.
The study by the National Academy of Sciences concluded that GMO farming practices have created pesticide-resistant...Breeding technique allows farmers to conventionally breed plants based on genetic markers; GMOs are unnecessary, costly, dangerous and now obsolete5/11/2016 - Advances in conventional breeding techniques have now rendered genetic engineering obsolete, according to a report authored by independent scientist Benno Vogel and published by Greenpeace. Indeed, the conventional breeding technique known as marker-assisted selection (MAS) allows farmers to rapidly...More proof the Clean Food movement is winning: Del Monte joins fast growing list of corporations eliminating GMOs from their products5/9/2016 - With the increased public pressure and negative press around the growth of GM crops, more and more corporations are opting out of using GMO products in their ingredients  and Del Monte is the latest food giant to make the switch.
The move from Del Monte comes as a result of pressure from investors...Pro-Monsanto Bill Nye the 'science guy' says GMOs are awesome and climate change skeptics should be thrown in prison... yeah, really4/23/2016 - Celebrity scientists such as Neil deGrasse Tyson, Michio Kaku and Bill Nye keep their careers afloat by embracing mainstream scientific theories and presenting them to the public in a reassuring show-biz manner  and not by applying any real criticalal thought themselves.
You don't get invited...The CULT of 'Scientism' explained: How scientific claims behind cancer, vaccines, psychiatric drugs and GMOs are nothing more than corporate-funded science FRAUD4/18/2016 - Sadly, what often passes for "science" today in the world of health is little more than "Scientism" -- a dangerous cult founded on irrational dogma and faith-based beliefs in faulty, fraudulent ideas being paraded as science.
A common trait that weaves its way through every topic of "Scientism" is...Mars, Inc., announces it will clearly label all GMOs on its products4/12/2016 - Over the last few weeks, there has been several amazing announcements from food giants that are seen as a step in the right direction by those who are trying to live a healthy, GMO-free lifestyle.
General Mills caved into the mounting public pressure to clearly label its foods GMO; Campbell's promised...The organic movement needs YOU to help spread awareness of organic agriculture vs. GMO4/10/2016 - Over the last 20 years, the agricultural industry has slowly and inconspicuously introduced genetically modified organisms (GMOs) to the world, dominating the market in just a few short years, while the majority of the public stays mostly uniformed.
Following Paul Berg's 1971 gene-splicing experiment,...Putin: Human evolution under big threat from GMOs, vaccines3/27/2016 - Those who support vaccine choice and oppose genetically modifying our food chain have an unlikely ally: Russian President Vladimir Putin.
As reported by the Health Freedom Alliance, a report that was prepared by the Russian Security Council (SCRF), a report which is currently circulating within the...Warning: Monsanto's GMO soy could give you blue balls!3/24/2016 - Bringing new meaning to the term blue balls, a study has shown that eating a diet containing genetically modified soy actually caused the testicles of rats to turn blue.
The study is just one of many cited in a report by the Institute for Responsible Technology reviewing research on the potential...General Mills surrenders to GMO labeling, reluctantly decides to label foods but still believes in fundamentally deceiving its own customers3/21/2016 - General Mills, a highly unethical food corporation that bitterly fought against labeling GMOs in California and Oregon, has now surrendered to Vermont's labeling laws and announced it will start labeling GMOs across the country.
"General Mills has announced it will start labeling products with genetically...Scientist who linked GMOs and glyphosate to rat tumors wins SECOND court case against criminal biotech shills who forged signatures to discredit his research3/21/2016 - The Parisian High Court has ruled that French Professor Gilles-Eric Seralini, a scientist known for his controversial research linking GM feed with cancerous tumor growth in rats, was right when he concluded that GMOs are unsafe for human consumption.
Marc Fellous, former chairman of France's Biomolecular...How Monsanto hijacked a science journal in an attempt to destroy scientific research linking GMOs and glyphosate to horrific cancer tumors3/16/2016 - Another skeleton is coming out of Monsanto's closet, and its implication will forever change how we view the relationship between corporations, scientific literature and government regulators. The infamous corporation is now being exposed for hijacking a science journal to suppress the facts that their...Ted Cruz goes all-in for Monsanto; insults tens of millions of health-conscious Americans by calling them 'anti science zealots'3/15/2016 - U.S. presidential candidate and Texas senator Ted Cruz went all-in for Monsanto on the campaign trail in Iowa, parroting Monsanto's propaganda by proclaiming that GMOs are feeding the world while insulting health-conscious consumers by equating support of GMO labeling with "anti-science zealotry."
At...EU chief scientist says precaution is 'irrelevant' regarding GMOs; gets called a 'dangerous imbecile' by Risk Engineering expert1/26/2016 - After EU chief scientist Anne Glover stated in an interview that genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are so safe that the precautionary principle is "irrelevant," noted risk engineering expert Nassim Nicholas Taleb of New York University shot back, calling her a "dangerous imbecile."
"There are...Science paper: The real purpose of modern medicine is 'engineered genocide' to reduce human population through covert infertility via vaccines, GMOs and drugs1/25/2016 - A hugely important paper has just been published in the Epidemiology: Open Access science journal. It is authored by Kevin Mugur Galalae, Founder and Director of the Center of Global Consciousness in Ontario.
In it, Galalae correctly points out that the entire medical-agricultural complex as it exists...Investing in infrastructure is how to feed the world; GMOs, chemical agriculture waste resources while corporations profit1/13/2016 - Right now, all the focus for increasing crop yields is centered on one method: Genetically modifying crops to make them resistant to pesticides and herbicides. In this model of farming, haste makes waste. Instead of working with the land, we poison it instead with chemicals like glyphosate. Even the...BREAKING: Taiwan bans GMOs from school lunches... mandates GMO labeling nationwide... throws down gauntlet on toxic foods from USA and Monsanto1/10/2016 - Even as the fascist, corrupt U.S. government and its regulators (FDA and USDA) actively conspire with the biotech industry to poison Americans with genetically modified foods, Taiwan has already passed and implemented a nationwide law to protect its citizens from GMOs.
Nearly a full year ago, Taiwan...Monsanto emails reveal coercion of university scientists to advertise harmful GMO products1/8/2016 - More evidence has emerged proving that chemical giant Monsanto is anything but neutral when it comes to presenting the facts about Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). A series of secret emails between Monsanto employees and various university scientists reveal that, regardless of whether or not money...Venezuela passes new law rejecting GMOs and seed patents nationwide1/7/2016 - In 2004, President Hugo Chavez prevented the planting of 500,000 acres of Monsanto's genetically modified (GM) corn. Since then the Venezuelan farmers have been expressing strong feelings against growing or buying GM seeds.
However, this didn't stop big corporations from trying to push their transgenic...Natural News announces recipients of the 2015 Media Fail Awards1/1/2016 - Where you get your news determines, to a large extent, what you ultimately end up believing about the world around you. If your favorite newspaper or cable news channel is sold out to pharmaceutical and vaccine interests, you're unlikely to get the honest truth about alternative medicine, for instance,...New multi-toxin GMOs that produce their own poison carry 'serious health and environmental risks' scientific review finds12/17/2015 - New strains of GM crops that produce pesticides in their own tissues are being approved without rigorous safety testing, even though they may carry "serious health and environmental risks," according to a research review conducted by scientists from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology and the...GMO industry manipulates the media, public opinion and politics with sleazy tactics, bought science and PR spin, report reveals12/14/2015 - An Oakland-based public interest group has published a new report detailing the extent to which agri-business giants like Monsanto have gone in mounting a public relations campaign aimed at legitimizing and defending genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in our food chain.
In "Seedy Business: What...Global consensus weighing against GMOs as majority of EU nations ban GMO cultivation12/9/2015 - The clock is ticking ever closer towards a much anticipated end for the world's biotech moguls. These corporate criminals are now being forced to watch their entire corrupt business model unravel, as country after country bans the cultivation of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs)  a synthetic...How America's food supply has been hijacked by multinational corporations11/24/2015 - Food is a natural human right -- not in the sense that governments should be in charge of providing it for the people, but rather that human beings are endowed with the right and responsibility to grow it for themselves and reap the fruits of their labor, without interference from governments and corporations.
But...Safety assessment standards for GMOs do not exist! Scientist offers $10 million challenge to Monsanto11/18/2015 - One of the brave and the bold, Dr. Shiva Ayyadurai is the newest scientist to stand up to Monsanto. Dr. Shiva says he will give Monsanto a $10 million building that he owns in Cambridge, Massachusetts if the corporation can disprove his statement that there are "no safety assessment standards" for genetically...The impacts of genetic engineering: not science, just lies and propaganda: the massive fraud behind GMOs exposed11/9/2015 - This is not what the GMO industry wanted to see: banner headlines today in major newspapers and across the internet exposing the fraud behind GMOs. But this constitutes much more than a PR nightmare. The story behind the headlines shakes the very foundations upon which the industry is built. (Story...Contributors to the Grocery Manufacturers Association - A leading opponent of GMO labeling11/4/2015 - The Grocery Manufacturers Association is one of the largest organizations representing the food industry. As of 2013, they had over 300 member businesses in food and beverage production as well as biotech and seed companies.
The Grocery Manufacturers Association is one of the leading opponents of...Formaldehyde in GMOs - Another Unlisted Ingredient11/3/2015 - By policy, the FDA considers GMO foods to be substantially equivalent to their non-genetically modified counterparts, and to be generally recognized as safe. GMOs do after all, look very similar to their conventional counterparts and they are grown under somewhat similar conditions. Under FDA guidelines,...GMO pushers now want to abort human babies to harvest organs for mad science transplants10/29/2015 - The Island of Dr. Moreau, a fictional sci-fi medical horror movie from 1996, has become reality in the United States where the organs of aborted babies is becoming a commodity, and one without morals, enticing a black market for abortions and abortion clinics to collaborate with an insidious industry...What vaccines and GMOs have in common10/15/2015 - Vaccines and GMOs have more in common than many people realize. Both the biotech and the pharmaceutical industry use the same arguments to get you to accept their products. If you are against GMOs or vaccines, then you must be anti-science!
Nothing could be further from the truth. It is the people...Germany seeks ban on GMOs to protect its citizens and environment9/18/2015 - There is good news from the anti-GMO battlefront in Europe: Germany has announced that it will seek to ban the import of GM seeds and prohibit the cultivation of GM crops in the European Union's largest economy.
German Agriculture Minister Christian Schmidt has stated that he intends to make use...Kellogg's Kashi cereal found to be full of GMOs and cancer-causing glyphosate9/11/2015 - Suffering a massive market blow after its parent company was exposed for funding efforts to block compulsory labeling of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), the Kashi brand of breakfast cereal is back for round two. GMO Free USA has published the official results of new independent laboratory tests,...University of Hawaii faculty call out corrupt, Monsanto-funded college for persecuting professor who supports GMO labeling9/11/2015 - A professor at the University of Hawaii's (UH) College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources, Hector Valenzuela, has been repeatedly stripped of his rights to freely express his opinion against GMOs and his support of GMO labeling. He's been the recipient of unprofessional emails from other faculty...GMO shill Kevin Folta throws pathetic Twitter tantrum after being exposed as a Monsanto whore9/10/2015 - Despite being outed as an unethical lying "academic," University of Florida Professor Kevin Folta isn't backing down, instead posting a barrage of illogical tweets in a cringe worthy episode of attacks and apparent self-defense.
Though Folta previously denied ties to the rich and powerful agricultural...Chipotle sees meteoric rise in revenue and stocks after banning GMOs from menu; McDonald's dies as Americans reject junk food9/10/2015 - Ever since Chipotle announced that they were removing genetically modified organisms from their menu, they have exploded onto the scene as an honest and wholesome brand, leaving junk food peddlers like McDonald's in their dust.
Chipotle is experiencing impressive growth as their shares reach all-time...The unknown consequences of GMOs threaten the very future of food and humanity9/6/2015 11:30:00 AM - The rapid advances in agriculture involving the use of genetically modified foods and seeds has progressed largely without a great deal of scrutiny, leaving millions of Americans wondering about their effects on humans and the environment. While GMO pushers and the government agencies that shield them...NEW independent website keeps track of breaking news on GMOs, Monsanto, glyphosate and more9/4/2015 3:03:33 PM - For all the latest biotechnology news, Natural News is proud to unveil the all-new GMO.news web resource, which offers readers all the top breaking articles and reports on genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), chemical pesticides such as Roundup (glyphosate), industry corruption, agriculture policy,...Scotland to ban GMOs to protect citizens' health; US government refuses to label GMOs despite support from 93% of citizens8/30/2015 - Founded as a representative republican democracy, America became the first country in the modern world to be ruled by the principle of the consent of the governed. Today, some 240 years after the beginning of our War of Independence, that notion seems like little more than a quaint anachronism.
Polls...Kellogg's Corn Flakes were invented to stop sexual behavior; thanks to GMOs, they're now doing just that!8/26/2015 - Did you know that Kellogg's Corn Flakes were originally meant to suppress sexual desire in people who ate them? That was the intention of corn flakes inventor John Harvey Kellogg, who believed that sex was unhealthy for the body as well as the soul. In order to spread his libido-suppressing invention...Washington Post science for sale: Propaganda rag derides essential nutrients while promoting Monsanto, GMOs and fluoride8/19/2015 - In typical manipulative form, The Washington Post recently declared fish oil supplements to be ineffective and "unproven" at protecting the heart, despite mounds of scientific evidence suggesting otherwise. Citing a few outlier studies that were poorly constructed and that included the use of pharmaceutical...GMO industry set to flood U.S. food supply with endless torrent of toxic chemicals8/18/2015 - The U.S. Department of Agriculture's recent approval of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) resistant to new herbicides will soon unleash a flood of new toxic chemicals across the nation's agricultural heartland, observers have warned.
Previously, nearly all GMO crops approved for planting were...Why is Russia so much smarter than the U.S. when it comes to GMOs?8/15/2015 - He may have a reputation internationally as a tough guy, but when it comes to the health of his people, Russian President Vladimir Putin is a softie.
But, as countless, shirtless photos of Russia's leader doing a variety of manly things have also proven, Putin is also into his health, which could...DARK Act would cause America's crop fields to be saturated with cancer-causing glyphosate8/7/2015 - A bill pending before the U.S. Senate would not just deny consumers the right to know whether their food contains genetically modified organisms (GMOs), it could also strip states of their right to limit or regulate the use of dangerous herbicide chemicals widely sprayed over fields of GMO crops.
The...Doctors Against GMOs - Hear from those who are speaking out against biotech8/4/2015 - The evidence is mounting  GMOs are a danger to health. Long-term studies have revealed organ damage, cancer, and reproductive damage in second and third generation animal studies. There are doctors who are willing to publicly take a stand against genetic engineering. Here are a few of them.
Dr....GMOs are dangerous to our health, according to latest independent research7/19/2015 - There has been a debate raging about GMOs for a long time now. On one side of the debate is the idea that genetic engineering is progress for humanity, and it is a natural extension of more traditional breeding techniques. The other side believes genetically modified foods are unsafe for human consumption...Russia says NO to GMO seeds; aims for food supply that's 'cleanest in the world'7/15/2015 - The future of agriculture in Russia won't involve genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), says the country's Deputy Prime Minister Arkady Dvorkovich. In order to preserve the quality and integrity of its food supply, Russia plans to stick with growing methods that protect the soil and boost yields naturally,...Why are we boycotting Kellogg's?7/12/2015 - Part of GMO Free USA's mission is to foster consumer rejection of GMOs until they are proven safe. Because it is difficult to rally the nation to boycott ALL GMO foods, we've chosen to use strategically targeted boycotts to change our broken food system. As it has happened in other countries, when one...Biotech industry uses Roundup-contaminated GMOs as control group feed in fraudulent animal studies7/9/2015 - The rodent feed used for control groups in laboratory studies -- including studies on the safety of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and pesticides -- is widely contaminated with those same GMOs and pesticides as well as toxic metals and PCBs, according to a study conducted by researchers from...University of Hawaii attacks Guatemalan professor for speaking out about GMOs6/23/2015 - Isn't freedom of speech a wonderful thing? The ability to say what's on your mind and freely express yourself is incredible, unless you're Hector Valenzuela, a professor at the University of Hawaii's (UH) College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources. He's worked there for more than 20 years but...The dialysis industry wants people to eat GMOs and glyphosate6/15/2015 - It's no secret that glyphosate, the active ingredient in Monsanto's Roundup, is at the center of heated controversy. Of course, Monsanto and its supporters maintain that the ingredient is safe, even after an arm of the World Health Organization -- the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)...'Free trade' partnerships are just corporate monopoly agreements for GMOs, pesticides and pharmaceuticals6/8/2015 - Despite the Obama Administration's best efforts to keep its negotiations regarding the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact secret, enough details have emerged through various sources to paint a very unflattering picture about the deal.
For instance, "trade" is a very small part of the TPP. According...Hillary Clinton's devotion to Monsanto's GMOs scares away Democrat voters5/21/2015 - Democratic presidential contender Hillary Clinton's ties to agri-business giant Monsanto, the largest manufacturer of genetically modified seeds and crops, are costing her support in the crucial early primary state of Iowa, itself a bastion of agricultural production.
As reported by The Washington...Flawed Nat Geo propaganda claims organic farming can feed the world - but only with GMOs5/13/2015 2:43:22 PM - How great would it be if organic farming were recognized as a way to feed the world? Of course, it has been acknowledged as a good idea by many people around the globe, including the folks involved with the popular magazine National Geographic. That's the good news. The bad? They're on board with it,...The chemical industry has been caught lying to the general public5/10/2015 - Pro-GMO activists would have us believe that genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are 'perfectly safe'. They'll tell us that GMOs make agricultural practices more sustainable; increase crop yields, reduce the use of pesticides, provide more nutritious foods and (my favorite lie) help make farming easier...Monsanto operatives bully academics who discuss cancer links to GMOs and glyphosate5/7/2015 - Agrochemical and biotech giant Monsanto claims it is just a global company seeking to help mankind engineer a better life. However, the company is increasingly behaving more like an element of organized crime, especially when faced with science that refutes its claims about how "safe" its genetically...Trojan Horse trade policy provides loophole for banned GMOs to enter Europe4/28/2015 - Even though the biotech moguls have attained near-total control over the conventional U.S. food supply, they're not content with this monopolistic feat. A new trade agreement being proposed with the European Union seeks to dump more American food exports into Europe, a move that will require European...BAM! Chipotle goes 100% non-GMO; flatly rejecting the biotech industry and its toxic food ingredients4/27/2015 - The free market victories against the sleazy biotech industry are coming at a rapid pace now, and the latest announcement is a real game changer: Chipotle Mexican Grill has outright rejected all GMOs and, as of today, is now serving all non-GMO ingredients in its foods.
"When it comes to our food,...No GMOs for the Gambia ever, declares president4/25/2015 - Only a couple of years after its Minister of Forestry declared that genetic engineering would most likely eventually make its way into the country, the Gambia in West Africa has now officially been declared to be GMO-free -- permanently.
Gambian President Yahya Jammeh announced during his speech...National Geographic is the propaganda arm of Monsanto, the world's most evil corporation4/24/2015 11:23:35 AM - Never in a million years would people think Bill Nye "the Science Guy" -- who once questioned genetically modified foods and urged against them -- would declare his love for altering genes. Yet after a meeting with the agricultural biotech giant, he announced that he was going to update the chapter...GMO basics for natural health - How to avoid and why you may need to detox4/22/2015 - GMOs are genetically modified foods made from combing genes from two or more unrelated species into one organism. The two most common types of genetic modifications are modifying crops to produce pesticides or modifying crops to be immune to herbicides (making them Roundup ready). Sugar beets have been...People reject GMOs because of Monsanto's 'hubris,' claims CEO of most evil company in the world4/20/2015 - In an ironically ostentatious and patronizing public relations stunt, the CEO of the world's most evil multinational corporation, Monsanto, recently offered some personal insights into why he believes people oppose genetically modified organisms (GMOs).
It isn't because GMOs are inherently unsafe,...Monsanto CEO claims GMOs are the only way to feed the world - Ever heard of permaculture?4/19/2015 - If Monsanto was a person, it would be a certifiable sociopath -- obsessed with itself, unaware of everyone and everything around it, and utterly delusional when it comes to facts and reality. And this seems to describe Monsanto CEO Hugh Grant to a T, as he recently told the U.K. paper The Independent...Sellout scientists who promote industry propaganda as science - trading humanity for profit4/13/2015 - GMO is anti-science. Who knew? The biotech industry in general is wrought with fraud, hucksters, shills and lobbyists. The following is a list of hucksters and shills who "sell their souls" for money to represent whoever cuts the biggest check. It all started with Big Tobacco and thousands of doctors...National Geographic's corporate-corrupted war on REALITY: how a once-upstanding mag now betrays humanity to push toxic poisons of advertisers4/8/2015 - The cover of this month's National Geographic magazine is causing some major controversy among the cognitively aware, as this once-upstanding and generally unbiased nature periodical has quite obviously fallen headlong into the clutches of corporate-controlled propaganda and lies.
Outlining what...GMOs vs artifical selection, and why Neil Degrasse Tyson and Bill Nye don't know what they're talking about4/4/2015 - According to the World Health Organization, GMOs are "...organisms in which the genetic material has been altered in a way that does not occur naturally."
Genetically modified organisms are organisms built with genes from more than one species. The process involves laboratories and scientists followed...World-famous scientist Jane Goodall condemns GMO food and fraudulent industry 'science'4/1/2015 - If Europe weakens its standards to allow the cultivation and import of untested genetically modified organisms (GMOs), it will be making a monumental and irreversible mistake based on corporate lies and pseudoscience. This was the emphatic warning recently given by primate expert and world-renowned...Only biotech-funded studies claim GMOs are safe: Independent scientists warn otherwise4/1/2015 - The general consensus on the safety of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) is that there really is no consensus at all, at least not among independent scientists looking honestly and unbiasedly at the issue. A peer-reviewed evaluation of the cohort of published literature on GMOs reveals that nearly...School curriculum for young students shamelessly promotes GMOs, vaccines3/31/2015 6:43:28 PM - The biotechnology agenda has now infiltrated public school curricula for sixth graders, with a captured screenshot of a student's homework essentially answering "yes" to the loaded question, "Are genetically modified foods safe to eat?"
As you'll see in the shocking (below), young students are now...Sorry, Monsanto3/30/2015 12:21:10 PM - A few weeks ago, I spoke by phone with Cathleen Enright, executive vice president of the Biotech Industry Organization (BIO).[1] (Long story). (Story by Katherine Paul, republished from CounterPunch.org.)
During the course of our conversation, when we touched on the subject of the science...Pro-terrorist Cornell University takes money from globalist Bill Gates to push GMOs destroying America3/30/2015 11:34:57 AM - Using financing from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Ivy League Cornell University's Alliance for Science has launched a multi-million-dollar broadside against a small food-oriented public interest group as a means of pushing genetically modified organisms to new markets around the world -- and...How did Bill Nye become the corporate propaganda guy? Former TV star now pushes eugenics, GMOs, corporate quack science3/27/2015 5:00:45 PM - All of his goofy antics aside, Bill Nye "the science guy" is anything but a genuine educational icon these days. A few meetings with Monsanto and the rest of the corporate cabal later, and Nye seems to have suddenly regressed into a propaganda mouthpiece for the powers that be, aggressively pushing...Soil health program boosts crop yields by 300% without GMOs or chemical-intensive factory farming3/24/2015 - Chemical farming is the norm, but it does not have to be. There are now more options than ever before that will allow farmers a higher yield without having to lace the soil with chemicals and then treat the crops as well. Knowing about these options can make a world of difference and can help farmers...Top 10 reasons GMOs should be labeled3/23/2015 - We all know that genetically modified organisms (GMOs) have not been proven safe based on the fact that there are no long-term studies on the health affects of GMOs or their associated pesticides. However, many skeptics insist that, because there are few studies showing harm from GMOs and the U.S. Food...MIT doctor reveals link between glyphosate, GMOs and the autism epidemic3/20/2015 - A major missing link in the search for what's triggering a massive spike in autism rates appears to be the world's best-selling weedkiller, Roundup. Dr. Stephanie Seneff from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has been studying the autism issue for several decades, and her copious research...GMOs 30-year morally disreputable history unraveled and unveiled for the public to witness in new book launching today3/20/2015 - If you've ever wondered what happened to the Nazi scientists when they were released from prison after WWII for their mass murdering rampage, they went to work for U.S. pharmaceutical companies that later went to work on our agriculture, calling it GMO.
From there, the situation worsened.
The...52 Congress members sign letter warning of GMOs killing monarch butterflies3/18/2015 4:48:37 PM - Dozens of House Democrats have signed onto a letter sent to President Obama claiming that the spread of GM crops is leading to the death of monarch butterflies.
The letter,[PDF] authored by Rep. Chellie Pingree of Maine, says that the butterflies are "in peril of being lost to the history...15 reasons to ignore biotech PR and label dangerous GMOs3/14/2015 - Chemical companies and their food conglomerate allies have spent hundreds of millions of dollars over the past several years fighting against your right to know what's in your food. No matter how the industry tries to spin the issue, people have a right to know if they're eating patented genetic material...Same delusional people who say vaccines are safe also insist GMOs, glyphosate, aspartame, mercury and radiation are safe, too3/9/2015 - If vaccines are perfectly safe as we're all told by the "institutional liars" of our delusional era, then why did Congress create a Vaccine Injury Compensation Program which has paid out nearly $3 billion in financial compensation to families of children who were provably injured by vaccines?
If...GMOs impact health of consumers, short-term trial shows; industry attempts to spin results, silence debate3/8/2015 - An animal feeding trial that European Union regulators are planning to use in forming future policy on genetically modified organisms (GMOs) has contradicted its own findings by claiming no adverse effects associated with Monsanto's MON810 GM corn and associated pesticides, including the broad-spectrum...Green sea slug steals photosynthesis genes by eating algae; gene transfer uncontrollable in wild3/8/2015 - Shedding new light on the dangers associated with cultivating genetically engineered organisms, which have the potential to spread into the wild, a recent study published in The Biological Bulletin explains how genes can transfer from one species to another and become a permanent part of the other species,...Bill Nye aligns himself with greatest science fraud of the century: GMO 'safety'3/5/2015 6:03:52 PM - Many of today's young adults grew up watching him on public access television. But Bill Nye "the Science Guy" has taken an unfortunate turn for the worse as it pertains to his position on genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), degenerating rather suddenly from an honest position of concern about their...GMO critics vindicated: Biotech corporations were pushing fraud all along3/5/2015 12:19:56 PM - The sordid sequence of events that opened the floodgates for the genetic takeover of the American food supply -- that is, the mass introduction of untested genetically-engineered (GE) food ingredients on the sly -- is outlined in an eye-opening new book by American public interest lawyer Steve Druker,...Monsanto's Roundup and GMOs are killing off monarch butterflies3/5/2015 - Monarch butterflies, sometimes referred to as the "king" of butterflies, are struggling to stay alive, their situation so dire that the Center for Biological Diversity has filed a petition requesting that they be considered an endangered species that requires special protection to survive.
The Fish...Kellogg's Froot Loops contains GMOs and glyphosate herbicide, lab tests verify3/2/2015 - With the food industry doing everything in its power to avoid having to tell the public that its products are laced with genetically modified (GM) additives, pesticides and other poisons, grassroots efforts to raise awareness about GMOs are flourishing. Recent laboratory tests conducted by GMO Free...GMOs invade fruit industry: Apples, pears, cherries and peaches to all become unlabeled GMO2/14/2015 - Genetically modified apples have been approved by the industry-corrupted USDA, a federal regulator that accomplishes for the biotech industry the same thing the FDA achieves for Big Pharma: unlimited profits, lax regulation and a ready willingness to accept fabricated "science" as fact.
"The USDA's...GMO labeling legislation introduced in Minnesota has massive public support2/9/2015 - In the dead of winter, the Minnesota State Legislature isn't letting the snow keep them from reintroducing legislation to label GMOs. At the end of January, HF 351 and SF 335 were proposed in both the House and the Senate. While the state has proposed legislation that would disclose the presence of...GMOs found growing in South Korea despite national ban1/26/2015 5:41:14 PM - More unapproved -- and in some cases, unidentifiable -- genetically modified (GM) plants are turning up in places where they shouldn't be. South Korea, which currently prohibits the cultivation of all GM crops anywhere in the country, is becoming beleaguered with wild GMO strains, according to new reports.
The...Survey: How many globalists avoid eating GMOs, drinking tap water and getting injected with vaccines?1/26/2015 12:40:59 PM - A globalist, in general terms, might be defined as someone who advocates planning of economic and foreign policy in relation to developments throughout the world. Most will claim their efforts are "for the greater good" or to "feed a starving world" -- or something to that effect -- but do they really...Scientists take lesson from 'Jurassic Park' in desperate attempt to keep GMOs contained1/21/2015 3:51:47 PM - As genetic scientists venture deeper down the murky rabbit hole of life re-engineered, they're having to take a step back and acknowledge that many of their reckless modifications could, and likely will, have permanent ramifications. Taking a page from the famous Jurassic Park story, the industry is...Dr. Tyrone Hayes explains how chemical companies use scientific fraud to sell GMOs and poison1/19/2015 3:39:08 PM - Dr. Tyrone Hayes, one of the most important scientists to expose the dangers of Syngenta's pesticide atrazine, was recently interviewed by the environmentalist blog TreeHugger. Dr. Hayes uncovered how the industry behind genetically modified organisms is also the industry that pushes agrochemicals....Deadly Agent Orange GMOs receive USDA approval despite overwhelming risks to humans, environment1/19/2015 1:43:38 PM - Agriculture officials have once again ignored science by suggesting deregulation of two new GMO crops from Monsanto that contain built-in resistance to chemicals derived from the same family as Agent Orange. Roundup Ready 2 Xtend soybeans and Bollgard II XtendFlex cotton are now one step closer to commercial...GM corn and soy cause damage to liver, kidneys, DNA, reproduction and blood according to new study1/15/2015 - New research published in the Turkish Journal of Biology completely shatters the myth that GMOs (genetically modified organisms) have been scientifically vested as safe. Scientists from the National Research Center in Egypt, after conducting what appears to be one of the first histopathological and...Industrial agriculture and GMOs are major purveyors of man-made CO21/13/2015 3:23:58 PM - If you intentionally burned wood in your fireplace without opening the flue or some windows, your entire house would quickly become engulfed in smoke with nowhere for it to escape. This is akin to the current situation with man-made carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, which thanks to industrial...Baby formula is loaded with GMOs - Avoid these brands1/13/2015 3:23:42 PM - A petition is circulating to persuade three of the top infant formula brands in the U.S. -- Abbott Laboratories (Similac), Mead Johnson Nutrition (Enfamil) and Nestle (Gerber Good Start) -- to stop using genetically modified (GM) ingredients in their baby products. Each of these powdered formulas is...GMOs contaminate Europe despite national bans; dangerous biotechnology can't be contained12/29/2014 5:26:56 PM - The idea that genetically modified (GM), conventional and organic crops can all coexist peacefully with one another while singing kumbaya next to the fire is an absolute delusion, as evidenced by a new study out of Europe. Researchers found that, despite bans on both the cultivation and import of GM...Organic food sales skyrocket across Australia, while GMOs lose traction12/24/2014 - Known for having one of the most outstanding economies in the world, with consistent high growth, low interest rates and low inflation, Australia is no stranger to the booming organic food market. In fact, the nation down under is home to the largest number of certified organically farmed hectares in...Agricultural contamination from GMOs is unavoidable, study shows12/7/2014 - The GM Contamination Register, run by GeneWatch and Greenpeace, has kept track of about 400 recorded cases of contamination incidents dating back to the unfortunate beginning of genetically modified crops in 1997 through the end of 2013.(1) It was developed to assess GM contamination because,...Neil deGrasse Tyson caught lying again, blurring distinction between GMOs and selective breeding12/4/2014 - Self-aggrandizing attention seeker and science bandit Neil deGrasse Tyson is back in the news after spouting more uneducated nonsense about genetically modified organisms (GMOs) during a recent interview. In a video clip posted to YouTube, Tyson is seen trying to convince his audience that people have...Study finds GMOs destroy environment and human health12/2/2014 - The arguments in favor of biotechnology-derived food -- that is, genetically modified organisms (GMOs) -- are a complete farce. A new study by the investment group Portfolio 21 explains that, despite their widespread adoption mostly in North America, GMOs are not saving farmers money, they're not producing...How to avoid GMOs when you're on a budget12/1/2014 - Story by Daisy Luther, republished from Eat Local Grown with additional editing by Natural News.
What's the most controversial topic at the grocery store these days?
It's GMOs.
Should you consume them? Are they okay in moderation? Should you strictly avoid them at all times? And if so, how...World's largest independent study on GMOs set to launch12/1/2014 - Big news for the Right to Know movement! Awareness regarding the dangers of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) has mushroomed, forcing the world to finally put genetically spliced food under the microscope.
Organizers announced in London on November 11 that they will be performing the world's...Natural News applauds FDA for requiring calorie labeling... so why not label GMOs, too?11/30/2014 - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has said it will adopt new regulations requiring chain restaurants, movie houses and some other food retailers that sell prepared foods to add calorie labels to their menus and menu boards rules that will apply only to chains with 20 or more restaurants. But the...Humans waste enough food to feed 3.48 billion people annually - GMOs weren't developed to 'feed the world'11/17/2014 - It isn't a lack of food that is the driving force behind world hunger, but rather a lack of effective food distribution. An estimated 1.43 billion tons of food go to waste every single year around the world, according to United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates, which is enough...Are GMOs doomed on the global market?11/11/2014 - Farmers in the U.S. are beginning to wake-up to the fact that genetically modified crops are poor business indeed. With countries around the world taking a firm stand against GM imports, not only are farmers who grow GMOs suffering from dwindling export opportunities, but also those whose crops have...Big Food uses 'natural' labels to trick you into eating GMOs11/2/2014 - Most Natural News readers are sufficiently wary of the terms natural or all-natural on packaged foods, even in health food stores. Too many who aren't aware think that natural means "organic" or at least "GMO-free." Surprise, not only are they not organic, but they often contain some GMOs.
Consumers...Former GMO scientist exposes the outright lies and propaganda of the biotech industry10/30/2014 12:21:01 PM - Thierry Vrain, who spent many years as a research scientist and genetically modified organism (GMO) advocate for Agriculture Canada, has recently gone public with his conclusion that GMOs are dangerous for humans, animals and the environment.
"I refute the claims of the biotechnology companies that...GMO lies vs. reality: 10 facts you need to know about Seralini biotech study10/7/2014 - Not long after its publishing, Professor Gilles-Eric Seralini's landmark study on genetically modified (GM) NK603 corn and Roundup herbicide received considerable undue criticism from the mainstream scientific community, which clearly didn't approve of its findings. But this doesn't negate the fact...How Monsanto, the World Bank and the IMF are working to force GMOs into a destabilized Ukraine9/8/2014 - Embattled Ukraine, which is currently under siege (practically) by a belligerent Russia, once upon a time used to be called the "Breadbasket of the Soviet Union," because most of the U.S.S.R.'s food came from there.
Even after the U.S.S.R. dissolved, Ukraine continued to be productive agriculturally,...GMOs likely to be approved by EPA and USDA will contribute to environmental degradation and human health decline9/3/2014 - The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Department of Agriculture (USDA) are readying to approve a powerful new herbicide, as well as three genetically modified organisms (GMOs) engineered to resist it, that has not been adequately vetted for either safety or effectiveness. And at least 50 members...Multinational scientists request help from the Pope to get destructive GMOs banned in Brazil8/20/2014 - When independent scientists and farmers start protesting GMOs to their governments without success, to whom can they turn? Well, the GMO resisters in the predominately Catholic country Brazil have decided to go papal. They intend to get the Pope on board to help ban GMOs and all the affiliated toxins...GMOs won't save us from climate change regardless of what Monsanto says, according to new study8/19/2014 - A major tenet of the biotechnology model of agriculture is that genetically modified (GM) crops help mitigate climate change by sequestering more carbon into the soil. But a new study published in the journal Nature Climate Change has determined this to be patently false, showing that no-till farming...$7 billion in sales for Non-GMO Project-verified foods in one year!8/18/2014 12:37:15 PM - The iconic butterfly (label) is really taking flight, surpassing projections by more than double last year, proving that 90% of Americans would love to know what is in their food and are taking actions to look for a label which tells them that the genes of their foods haven't been modified and altered...GMOs and environmental destruction - Pope Francis urges humanity to respect nature8/13/2014 - "Isn't humanity committing suicide with this indiscriminate and tyrannical use of nature?"
That was a question asked recently by Pope Francis, as part of his continuous plea with the world to "respect" our environment.
It's not a bad message, it is just incomplete when you consider that the vast...Label GMOs Texas: grassroots campaign for food transparency launched in the Lone Star State8/11/2014 - A grassroots campaign to require honest GMO labeling on food products has been launched in Texas. Called "Label GMOs Texas," the campaign follows in the footsteps of the highly successful Vermont campaign which achieved victory earlier this year.
The Facebook page for the Texas campaign is available...7 ways GMOs are destroying humanity and the planet8/7/2014 - No matter what personal views you might have on genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), these relatively new biological creations are wreaking havoc on both the environment and human health, as thoroughly demonstrated in the scientific literature. And here are seven concrete examples of why:
1) GMOs...If GMOs are healthy, why aren't its proponents (Biotech and Big Food) excited about labeling it?8/3/2014 - Proponents of genetically modified food say that a "GMO" label on foods would mislead people into believing that they are unhealthy or unsafe. Why is that? Are they unhealthy or unsafe?! Proponents of GMO food (investors and manufacturers) have spent millions and millions of dollars to keep them unlabeled,...HuffPost: GMOs have never been proven safe7/29/2014 - Proponents of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) often proclaim that the technology has been fully vetted in terms of human safety, and that anyone objecting to the continued unlabeled use of GMOs in the food supply is somehow dredging up unfounded conspiracy theories. But the truth of the matter...GMO pushers horrified at idea of being held responsible for their role in farmer suicides, crop failures and environmental devastation7/27/2014 - The single greatest fear of GMO pushers has just been revealed. In the days after I wrote my now-famous article comparing GMO advocates to Nazi collaborators, the blogosphere erupted with a heated discussion of Monsanto, journalism, the scientific dictatorship of the Nazi empire and the parallels with...The Agricultural Holocaust explained: the 10 worst ways GMOs threaten humanity and our natural world7/27/2014 - Why are genetically modified organisms (GMOs) a serious threat to humanity and the environment? The reasons span the realms of science, social justice, economics and the environment, and once you understand this, you'll readily understand why so many environmentalists, humanitarians, responsible scientists...Michelle Obama GMO hoax explodes into public backlash against Monsanto7/25/2014 - We all got a good laugh today: The Michelle Obama GMO story that went viral Friday has been confirmed as a hoax, but it produced such a backlash of anger against the First Lady and Monsanto that the outcry became a new story all by itself. In a very real sense, the hoax story became a whole new story...Green PolkaDot Box creates way to feed the world healthy food without harmful GMOs or poisons7/24/2014 - Several years ago, Natural News announced the launch of the world's first online buying club for organic and non-GMO foods, Green PolkaDot Box, which offers healthy foods and consumer products to the public at wholesale prices. Well, now, this pioneer in clean living is unveiling a new concept that...Even WSJ agrees: GMOs threaten food security while offering no solution for India's poor7/22/2014 - The government of India appears to be slowly falling into the clutches of multinational chemical companies craftily pushing their own patented genetically modified (GM) crops as the solution to hunger and poverty, with a new bill set to deliver subsidized food made from these poisons to more than 800...Science for sale: The true history of silencing whistleblowers with corporate science7/21/2014 - After watching the bizarre and irrational reaction to the original story I published here, I've decided to replace it with a meta analysis of what the reaction to this story really says about today's corrupt media and irresponsible "corporate science" operators.
For the record, the story which originally...Xanax made with GMOs, allergens and artificial coloring chemicals7/14/2014 - Just like nearly every other drug, the anti-anxiety drug Xanax contains fillers and additives that are listed as "inactive" ingredients, but which actually can pose significant health risks. The only way to avoid ingesting those potentially dangerous chemicals and compounds is to avoid taking the medications.
But...Hillary Clinton says she supports GMOs7/9/2014 - The darling of the Democratic Party, Hillary Rodham Clinton, says she supports genetically modified food, making her no different from most other American politicians from both major political parties.
In a recent speech before the world's largest biotechnology meeting in San Diego, Clinton -- who...See all 874 GMOs feature articles.Concept-related articles:Consumers:Safeguard Organic Standards: 10 Reasons Consumers Buy OrganicThe great direct-to-consumer prescription drug advertising con: how patients and doctors alike are easily influenced to demand dangerous drugsIf given a fair choice, most consumers would choose alternative medicine over conventional health careInterview: Organic Consumers Association's Ronnie Cummins tells the truth about organic milk that isn'tOrganic Consumers Association calls out Dr. Oz for 'flip-flopping' with high-profile attacks on organicsCorn:High-Fructose Corn Syrup and Diabetes: What the Experts SayGMO:Non-GMO Project responds to OCA over GMOs, coexistence and effective activismFood:The Honest Food Guide empowers consumers with independent information about foods and healthFoods:Whole Foods caught in GMO marketing deception, false advertising - here's the proofEnvironment:Humans vs. the environment - A thought experimentIngredients:How food manufacturers trick consumers with deceptive ingredients listsProducts:Interview with Alan Friedman from Good Cause Wellness about Antioxidants, Agave Nectar and Chia SeedsWHO:Whole Foods caught in GMO marketing deception, false advertising - here's the proofEnvironmental:'Organic' from China exposed: The shocking truth about 'organic' foods grown in the world's worst environmental cesspoolGenetically modified:Genetically Modified Organisms are Unfit for ConsumptionAwareness:Breast cancer awareness campaigns cause more harm than goodControversy:Doctor from MMR controversy wins High Court appeal - next up, Dr. Andrew Wakefield himselfCreator:Framework of the cosmic game: How stuff works beyond the realm of materialismOrganic products:UNFI, independent distributor of natural and organic products, unites in opposition to GM alfalfaLabeling:EXCLUSIVE: Just Label It organization a GMO greenwashing corporate front group , say industry insiders
Subscribe to the Health Ranger's
FREE email newsletter
Follow @HealthRanger
Concepts related to GMOsconsumers  corn  GMO  food  foods  environment  ingredients  products  WHO  environmental  genetically modified  awareness  controversy  personality  Creator  organic products  labeling  labels  organic  regulations  regulation  states  steps  marketing  fast food  restaurants  nutrition  cancer  overweight  diabetes  prevention  soft drinks  cravings  processed foods  heart disease  the FDA  chocolate  the brain  food industry  food supply  food additives View GMOs on NaturalPedia
Today's Top Stories on NaturalNews
Today | Week | Month | Year
Halftime HELL: Satan speaks through Lady Gaga to declare dominion over the Earth (while Pope Francis blesses) (satire) - NaturalNews.com
Record radiation level detected at Fukushima reactor unimaginable, could kill human from even brief exposure - NaturalNews.com
Tom Brady eats organic clean foods and superfoods to keep WINNING - NaturalNews.com
Nutritionist warns: 3 ingredients that can make your smoothies far less healthy - NaturalNews.com
Global warming world map based largely on fake science  NOAA caught in blatant temperature data fraud - NaturalNews.com
Bill introduced in Congress to Terminate the EPA - NaturalNews.com
Over 30,000 scientists say 'Catastrophic Man-Made Global Warming' is a complete hoax and science lie
After stunning comeback victory for the Patriots, will CNN now report the Russians hacked the Superbowl? - NaturalNews.com
OOPS: Man eaten alive at zoo after trying to sneak in through tigers pen - NaturalNews.com
Hexavalent chromium (chromium-6) was just found in 75% of drinking water... the mass chemical suicide of America is under way
UN official claims global warming hoax is all about eliminating capitalism, suppressing the economy - NaturalNews.com
Whole Foods selling protein products containing toxic heavy metals: new video reveals clean vs. contaminated products
Vitamin C outperforms vaccines
Big Pharma documentary: History of chemicals, poison, disease, power and kids on amphetamines - NaturalNews.com
Entire global food supply to be contaminated by genetically modified organisms used for pest control, warn scientists - NaturalNews.com
The 8 Most Dangerous Medicines on Earth... are you taking any of these?
Massive student loan fraud scam: 99.8% of repayment data fraudulently altered by schools - NaturalNews.com
Scientist develops biodegradable, edible non-plastic bags to halt the continued plastic pollution of the world - NaturalNews.com
CONFIRMED: Cancer is entirely a man-made disease
The 8 Most Dangerous Medicines on Earth... are you taking any of these?
Hexavalent chromium (chromium-6) was just found in 75% of drinking water... the mass chemical suicide of America is under way
FDA quietly bans powerful life-saving intravenous Vitamin C - NaturalNews.com
Halftime HELL: Satan speaks through Lady Gaga to declare dominion over the Earth (while Pope Francis blesses) (satire) - NaturalNews.com
How George Soros and Hillary Clinton almost conquered the world (but were stopped just in time) - NaturalNews.com
Donald Trump the last President of these United States? America may fracture and descend into civil war - NaturalNews.com
Record radiation level detected at Fukushima reactor unimaginable, could kill human from even brief exposure - NaturalNews.com
Top 9 vaccines you NEVER need and exactly why the CDC has to scare everybody into getting them
Total hypocrisy: Obama routinely bombed 5 out of the 7 countries Trump just banned, but the media said nothing - NaturalNews.com
White womens march a sickening celebration of genocide against blacks: The Planned Parenthood legacy youve never been told - NaturalNews.com
Homeschool dad sues federal government for kidnapping his 7 children medical tyranny run amok - NaturalNews.com
Muslim ban a total lie fact-less media gins up mass hysteria among left-wing zombie trolls America now a mob-ocracy - NaturalNews.com
BIOSLUDGED movie trailer released: The Health Rangers stunning science investigation into the greatest environmental crime youve NEVER known - NaturalNews.com
Finally! Trump administration blacklists fake news CNN - NaturalNews.com
Internet abuzz with sighting of unexplained, massive disc structure apparently buried in the ice near the South Pole - NaturalNews.com
#DefundBerkeley  Time to pull all federal funds from UC Berkeley after liberal students turn into violent thugs to block Milo speech - NaturalNews.com
The one simple message every crybaby snowflake needs to hear: NO, you are not special by default - NaturalNews.com
CONFIRMED: Cancer is entirely a man-made disease
The 8 Most Dangerous Medicines on Earth... are you taking any of these?
Trumps attack on Big Pharmas cartel profiteering lost the drug industry about $25 billion in 20 minutes - NaturalNews.com
Hexavalent chromium (chromium-6) was just found in 75% of drinking water... the mass chemical suicide of America is under way
FDA quietly bans powerful life-saving intravenous Vitamin C - NaturalNews.com
Californian Senator Richard Pan pushing to outlaw parental rights in all medical decisions - NaturalNews.com
Halftime HELL: Satan speaks through Lady Gaga to declare dominion over the Earth (while Pope Francis blesses) (satire) - NaturalNews.com
Draining the Pharma swamp: Donald Trump announces plan to hammer Big Pharmas monopoly profits by requiring competitive bidding for government drug purchase contracts - NaturalNews.com
CDC scientist confirms Donald Trump is right about vaccines and autism
One big, fat, ugly bubble is about to burst and Donald Trump will be wrongly blamed for it - NaturalNews.com
10 brands of baby wipes recalled due to pneumonia-causing bacteria contamination
Ten horrifying ingredients that prove McDonalds is not fit for consumption - NaturalNews.com
Trump takes aim at vaccines, names Robert F. Kennedy Jr. head of new commission to expose dangers of mercury preservative (Thimerosal) - NaturalNews.com
The Amish, who dont get vaccinated, rarely get autism, cancer, or heart disease - coincidence? - NaturalNews.com
Goodbye, Obama, you sleeper cell traitor and enemy of America (you wont be missed) - NaturalNews.com
How George Soros and Hillary Clinton almost conquered the world (but were stopped just in time) - NaturalNews.com
Muslim ban a total lie fact-less media gins up mass hysteria among left-wing zombie trolls America now a mob-ocracy - NaturalNews.com
Total hypocrisy: Obama routinely bombed 5 out of the 7 countries Trump just banned, but the media said nothing - NaturalNews.com
Salmon caught near Seattle proven to be inundated with antidepressants, cocaine and more
The best and worst forms of magnesium to take as a supplement
What you are not being told about the Zika virus
Pepsi admits its soda contains cancer-causing ingredients
Does green tea have caffeine?
Seven things you need to know
The 8 Most Dangerous Medicines on Earth... are you taking any of these?
Top six alkaline foods to eat every day for vibrant health
Smokers or past smokers: Six ways to cleanse and revitalize your lungs
Zika HOAX exposed by South American doctors: Brain deformations caused by larvicide chemical linked to Monsanto; GM mosquitoes a 'total failure'
Hillary Clinton's health in rapid collapse... voters in shock after photos show her unable to walk up small flight of stairs
10 health benefits of cucumbers
12 easy ways to remove acid build-up from your body, alkalize your pH and beat disease
Chaos will erupt across America in less than 100 days... no matter who wins the election
Testosterone cures cancer; doctors stunned at discovery - NaturalNews.com
Top 9 vaccines you NEVER need and exactly why the CDC has to scare everybody into getting them
Ten home remedies for fever - Natural ways to reduce a high fever and treat the flu using simple products found in most homes
CONFIRMED: Cancer is entirely a man-made disease
Five ingredients that poison your brain
See All Top Headlines...
Most Popular Stories
TED aligns with Monsanto, halting any talks about GMOs, 'food as medicine' or natural healing
10 other companies that use the same Subway yoga mat chemical in their buns
Warning: Enrolling in Obamacare allows government to link your IP address with your name, social security number, bank accounts and web surfing habits
High-dose vitamin C injections shown to annihilate cancer
USDA to allow U.S. to be overrun with contaminated chicken from China
Vaccine fraud exposed: Measles and mumps making a huge comeback because vaccines are designed to fail, say Merck virologists
New USDA rule allows hidden feces, pus, bacteria and bleach in conventional poultry
Battle for humanity nearly lost: global food supply deliberately engineered to end life, not nourish it
Harvard research links fluoridated water to ADHD, mental disorders
10 outrageous (but true) facts about vaccines the CDC and the vaccine industry don't want you to know
EBT card food stamp recipients ransack Wal-Mart stores, stealing carts full of food during federal computer glitch
Cannabis kicks Lyme disease to the curb
Recommended Resources
TV.NaturalNews.com is
a free video website featuring thousands of videos on holistic health, nutrition,
fitness, recipes, natural remedies and much more.
CounterThink Cartoons are
free to view and download. They cover topics like health, environment and freedom.
The Consumer Wellness Center is
a non-profit organization offering nutrition education grants to programs that
help children and expectant mothers around the world.
Food Investigations is
a series of mini-documentaries exposing the truth about dangerous ingredients
in the food supply.
Webseed.com offers
alternative health programs, documentaries and more.
The Honest Food Guide is
a free, downloadable public health and nutrition chart that dares to tell the
truth about what foods we should really be eating.
HealingFoodReference.com offers
a free online reference database of healing foods, phytonutrients and plant-based
medicines that prevent or treat diseases and health conditions.
HerbReference.com is
a free, online reference library that lists medicinal herbs and their health
benefits.
NutrientReference.com is
a free online reference database of phytonutrients (natural medicines found in
foods) and their health benefits. Lists diseases, foods, herbs and more.
This
site is part of the Natural News Network  2014 All Rights
Reserved. Privacy | Terms All
content posted on this site is commentary or opinion and is protected under Free
Speech. Truth Publishing International, LTD. is not responsible for content written
by contributing authors. The information on this site is provided for educational
and entertainment purposes only. It is not intended as a substitute for professional
advice of any kind. Truth Publishing assumes no responsibility for the use or
misuse of this material. Your use of this website indicates your agreement to
these terms and those published here. All trademarks,
registered trademarks and servicemarks mentioned on this site are the property
of their respective owners.