Were having the wrong argument about GMOs - The Washington Post
2
Desktop notifications are on  | Turn off
Get breaking news alerts from
The Washington Post
Turn on desktop notifications?
Yes Not now
It looks like you've previously blocked notifications. Please update your browser permissions to allow them.
Sections
Sign In
Username
Subscribe
Accessibility for screenreader
Home Page
U.S. & World
|
Regional
Politics
PowerPost
The Fix
White House
Courts and Law
Polling
Monkey Cage
Fact Checker
Post Politics Blog
Opinions
The Post's View
Toles Cartoons
Telnaes Animations
Local Opinions
Global Opinions
Letters to the Editor
Act Four
All Opinions Are Local
Book Party
Compost
Erik Wemple
Five Myths
In Theory
The Plum Line
PostEverything
PostPartisan
Rampage
Right Turn
The Watch
Volokh Conspiracy
DemocracyPost
Sports
Redskins
NFL
MLB
NBA
NHL
AllMetSports
Soccer
Boxing/MMA
College Sports
College Football
College Basketball
D.C. Sports Bog
Early Lead
Fancy Stats
Golf
Tennis
Fantasy Sports
Local
D.C.
Maryland
Virginia
Public Safety
Education
Obituaries
Transportation
Weather
National
Acts of Faith
Health and Science
National Security
Investigations
Morning Mix
Post Nation
True Crime
Obituaries
World
Africa
The Americas
Asia and Pacific
Europe
Middle East
National Security
WorldViews
Checkpoint
Business
Wonkblog
On Leadership
Personal Finance
Digger
Energy and Environment
Markets
On Small Business
World Business
Capital Business
Tech
Innovations
The Switch
Lifestyle
Arts and Entertainment
Advice
Carolyn Hax
Food
Travel
Wellness
Magazine
Home and Garden
Inspired Life
Fashion
KidsPost
On Parenting
Reliable Source
The Intersect
Solo-ish
Entertainment
Books
Comics
Comic Riffs
Going Out Guide
Horoscopes
Movies
Museums
Music
Puzzles and Games
Theater and Dance
TV
Restaurants
Bars & Clubs
Crosswords
Video
World
Top News
Entertainment
Local
Popular Video
Politics
Live
Sports
Opinions
National
Business
Technology
Style
Photography
In Sight
Washington Post Live
Events
Live Chats
Real Estate
Rentals
Where We Live
Recently Sold Homes
Cars
Jobs
Classifieds
Partners
Express
Parade
WP BrandStudio
washingtonpost.com
1996-2017 The Washington Post
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Submissions and Discussion Policy
RSS Terms of Service
Ad Choices
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Share on Google Plus
Share via Email
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Pinterest
Share on Tumblr
Resize Text Print Article
Comments20+
The inside track on Washington politics.
Be the first to know about new
stories from PowerPost. Sign up to follow, and well e-mail you free updates as theyre published.
Youll receive free e-mail news updates each time a new story is published.
Youre all set!
Sign up
*Invalid email address
Got it
Got it
Wonkblog
Were having the wrong argument about GMOs
The inside track on Washington politics.
Be the first to know about new
stories from PowerPost. Sign up to follow, and well e-mail you free updates as theyre published.
Youll receive free e-mail news updates each time a new story is published.
Youre all set!
Sign up
*Invalid email address
Got it
Got it
By Caitlin Dewey
By Caitlin Dewey
February 6 at 11:31 AM
Follow @caitlindewey
Whole Foods has clearly marked many of their shelves with labels promoting the non-GMO products. (Gordon Chibroski/Portland Press Herald via Getty Images)
The Pew Research Center recently polled Americans on their concerns about genetically modified foods. Predictably, given the popular consternation around GMOs, a considerable plurality said they had concerns: 49 percent worried about the effects of GMOs on our health; the same number believed that GMOs would harm the environment.
But McKay Jenkins, a journalist who spent several years researching GMOs, says both of these concerns fundamentally miss the mark. In his new book, Food Fight: GMOs and the Future of the American Diet, Jenkins makes the case that its not GMOs we should single out for criticism  it'sthe industrial agricultural system that they power. After all, Jenkins points out, genetic engineering has thus far been limited to Americas largest commodity crops, such ascorn and soybeans. (According to the Department of Agriculture, 92 percent of U.S. corn acres are planted with GM varieties; for soybeans, its 94 percent.) Both corn and soy are typically grown in vast Midwestern monocultures, doused with nitrogen fertilizers and synthetic pesticides. They also supply the vast amounts of corn syrup, soybean oil and cheap livestock feed needed to power both the fast food and processed food industries. I first spoke to Jenkins last month for a story on the first genetically modified apple, which recently hit stores in the Midwest. I called him up again last week to chat about the big-picture, structural problems with GMOs in more depth. This conversation has been edited for clarity and length.
[The apple that never browns wants to change your mind about genetically modified foods]
Before we get too deep into this, I wanted to ask you a quick procedural question: You know, better than I do, that its very difficult to report on GMOs. Everyone claims to have science on their side. Everyone also has very strong feelings on how that science should be interpreted. How did you go about assessing the evidence? Before I started writing this book, the journalists that I knew who had tried to write about it previously warned me that anybody who touches GMOs gets burned. People are so worked up on both sides that no matter what you say, somebodys going to scream about it. As a journalist, you know that anytime thats true theres something worth looking into. On this issue theres a lot of stuff that is tossed around thats confusing on both sides. And when I say both sides, I realize there arent just two sides to the GMO issue. You have industry that is trying to convince you that all GMOs are fine, and then you have anti-GMO groups that have quote-unquote science theyre reporting thats not necessarily reliable, and you have global debates, and local debates, and debates over labeling, and debates over health, and debates over ecological impacts. All these different things are all going on at the same time.
[Why we're so scared of GMOs, according to someone who has studied them from the start]
I decided pretty quickly that I wasnt going to try to get into the debate of whether eating a genetically altered tortilla chip was going to cause you to get cancer or not. Thats pretty much the only question general consumers seem to have, but that was not the question that most interested me. The screaming on both sides of that question is so loud and so shrill that I cant hear any truth in it. I think its safe to say that the vast majority of scientists seem to have agreed that genetic engineering as such is not a cause for concern. Now even as I say that, its important to know there are plenty of scientists who dont agree. But I still dont think thats the most important question. Instead, I went in search of GMO scientists that had the larger question of sustainable, nutritious food in mind. I wasnt interested in finding out what someone who works for a giant agrochemical company thought about whether GMOs could make monoculture corn better. The pro-GMO scientists I wanted to talk to were the ones who were thinking about using genetic engineering to solve, for example, nutritional deficiencies or to solve drought problems or to solve fossil fuel overdependence. People who were using technology in ways that would advance the goal of sustainable agriculture. Thats actually a main criticism of the book, right  that GMOs are part of an agricultural system that is not environmentally or socially sustainable? Yes. Another category of scientists I spoke to were people like Wes Jackson and his crew out at the Land Institute, who think the GMO question is at best a part of this problem, and at worse a distraction from the larger problem  that really GMOs are just the latest version of a 30- or 40-year-old industrial food system that has gone completely off the rails. By focusing so much on GMOs, youre not paying attention to species loss or the decline in aquifers or soil depletion or greenhouse gasses or all the other problems tied up on industrial food production. And Im sympathetic to that argument. I think GMOs have gotten a lot of attention because they elicit a visceral fear from people, but really we have a lot of other agricultural problems that predate GMOs. If you think about factory farming or fossil fuels or toxic chemicals or soil loss  those things all existed before GMOs, and GMOs just scaled them up. What do you meanwhen you say GMOs just scaled up agriculture's problems? The short version is that GMO technology, along with synthetic fertilizers, has allowed industrial-scale farmers to grow a very small number of crops incredibly efficiently. These firms are not out there making GMO zucchinis and broccolis and red peppers and all that  theyre making corn and soybeans and canola oil and sugar beets. Theyre making components that either go into processed food, or are used to feed processed, industrial meat.
[The decline of the small American family farm in one chart]
Thats been great for the food industry, because they can provide a huge amount of calories and lots of different kinds of food products. You have something like 230 million acres of GMO corn and soybeans in the Midwest, which is then processed into the food that we eat  fast food or those processed foods that just need to be popped into the microwave that you buy in the supermarket. The average supermarket has something like 46,000 different products in it, and a good percentage of those are built out of those couple of grains, which are mostly GMO. The GMO technology has simply allowed an already industrial system to become even bigger and more efficient. I remember the first time we spoke, you said that GMOs are at the heart of the obesity epidemic, that theyve fueled this whole system thats wreaked havoc on American health. How did you make that connection? If you back these conversations up and you ask what are people eating that is making them obese, the answer is lots of soft drinks, lots of fast food, lots of processed food. Theres no disputing that. Everyone agrees on that. And then you back that up and say, What are those things made of? And the answer is always,Well, theyre mostly made out of corn or soybeans. The corn is processed into high-fructose corn syrup, which goes into sodas; the corn and soybeans go into feeding the animals that become fast-food hamburgers or chicken nuggets. To say that GMOs cause obesity is disingenuous. But its also true that GMOs are a central technological component of the system that is providing this kind of food in that kind of quantity.
Its fascinating to look at these issuesas part of an integrated system. That's typically not the perspective we hear. But when it comes to reform orregulation, I wonder if that view becomes counterproductive. What can possibly be done to reinvent the entire industrial ag system? Just practically speaking,it's much easier to, say, require GMO products have some sort of label. I have the same problem with this question that the climate people have with the climate change question. What would solve climate change? Driving a Prius might help you feel better, but it's not really going to do anything. Eating local, organic produce is going to help you feel better and help put some money in the pocket of your local farmer, but until thats scaled up its not going to make a dent in the structural problem. So the question becomes, what kinds of changes do make dents? I believe it all comes down to somehow getting the reins on the companies and the industries that have essentially dictated federal food policy for a very long time. Its no secret that these are some of the largest companies in the world. When you look at federal subsidies or regulatory policy, or when you look at how much money goes to big companies as opposed to small farmers, you can see that influence. We have the same problem with big agriculture we do with big energy. Power has become so centralized that policy supports these companies. This is why you'll hear over and over again, almost regardless of the industry, that they want all regulation to be centered in Washington, rather than be dictated by the states. Because what these industries want to do is manage policy at the federal level where they can actually control either an administration or Congress, as opposed to running around and trying to put out fires in Sacramento or Boston or Annapolis. You describe a really interesting vision for the future of agriculture in your book. Its a lot more moderate than some of the more utopian, foodie visions we tend to hear about. Why is that? And what is your vision? Well, I guess the fact that my vision doesnt exist at the moment means it might be a little utopian itself. I dont want to pretend its something that could happen next week. But by the end of this project, I became somewhat agnostic about GMO technology itself and much more interested in the larger question of sustainable food production. And there are many more things that go into sustainable food production. If a farmer on the Eastern Shore wants to raise tomatoes using small amounts of herbicides, and she also wants to raise some GMO corn, and she uses cover crops and protects the water and forests the creekbeds and manages nutrients so that things arent getting into the Chesapeake Bay  to me thats fine. The goal is sustainability. The goal is not some kind of purity. Weve got a lot of people to feed, and we have a lot of brilliant people working on this technology. To say we can go from where we are now to some kind of perfect technology-free farming system is a fantasy. I think its the responsibility of consumers to make that happen, though. Its not for me to tell farmers what to do; they will provide the food that the market demands. People vote about food every time they sit down for a meal. I joke with my students that some kids in cities around here think that potatoes grow on trees. And that might be ludicrous, but if youve never seen a potato, what concept are you going to have of how it grows? And if you dont know it grows in the dirt, then why would you care about the quality of the soil it grows in? When you start backing this stuff up, you see that the ignorance of the consumer is absolutely as much to blame for the current state of the food system, as much as anything that farmers are doing. I would imagine this has informed how you eat, too, right? Do you personally avoid GMOs? I try to avoid GMOs mainly by doing my best to avoid the fast foods, processed foods and junk foods that GMOs are mostly used to produce. I do try to eat as much organic produce as possible, which helps reduce my family's exposure to the insecticides and herbicides sprayed on industrial food crops, many of which are GMO. My family and I are members of One Straw Farm, a wonderful organic Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) farm in Baltimore County that provides six full months of organic produce every year and which makes us feel better about supporting the local economy and local farmers who take excellent care of their land. Just last week I wrote a check for $600 to the CSA. Not to sound sentimental about this, but farming  especially super-intelligent, sustainable farming  is worth everything we can invest in it. More from Wonkblog: The apple that never browns wants to change your mind about genetically modified foods You could soon pay more money for worse food. Thanks, Donald Trump. 7 of the biggest facts about unhealthy food that actually arent true
business
wonkblog
true
Please provide a valid email address.
Sign up
Youre all set!
See all newsletters
20+
Comments
Share on FacebookShare
Share on TwitterTweet
Share via Email
Caitlin Dewey is the food policy writer for Wonkblog. Subscribe to her daily newsletter: tinyletter.com/cdewey.
Follow @caitlindewey
TOP STORIES
Federal appeals court to consider whether to restore travel ban Today's hearing comes as lawyers for the Justice Department urged judges to restore President Trumps immigration order, calling it a lawful exercise of his authority and asserting that a U.S. District judges decision to temporarily stop it was vastly overbroad. Tech companies, law professors and former high-ranking national security officials joined a mushrooming legal campaign to keep the ban suspended. By Matt Zapotosky13 hours ago Fact Checker: Trump's claim that Obama 'identified' the 7 countries in his travel ban
Trump plays the terrorism blame-game, preemptively accusing courts and media The presidents approach is in keeping with how he ran his campaign, looking for scapegoats at nearly every turn. The move is not without risk. By Philip Rucker12 hours ago Whats missing from Trumps list of terrorist attacks: Non-Western victimsAnalysis: List of underreported attacks is a bid to manipulate media
Melania Trump missed out on once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to make millions, lawsuit says
The Fix: Mike Pences awkward  and telling  response about Russia
Hundreds of current, former EPA employees urge Senate to reject Pruitt
A view of the golf course in Doonbeg, Ireland. (Griff Witte/Post)
Trump tried and failed to build a wall at his Irish golf course. He hasnt forgotten. The dispute over the proposed two-mile barrier at Trump International Golf Links colored the presidents opinion of the European Union, whose regulations he blamed for the setback. I found it to be a very unpleasant experience, he told interviewers last month. A very bad experience, he emphasized weeks later. By Griff Witte18 hours ago
California and Trump are going to war with each other Donald Trump threatens Californias funding; California threatens to pack up and go. Neither is likely to happen. But its interesting that a presidents relationship with the Golden State could be rockier than his relationship with Russia. By Philip BumpAnalysis16 hours ago
Vice presidents tie-breaking vote likely needed
Live video: Senate debates DeVos nomination The Fix: Democrats 24-hour talkathon proves how little power they haveShe had something to say about DeVos. So she sent her senator a pizza  with a message.
23
Show Comments
Discussion Policy
0 Comments
SuperFan Badge SuperFan badge holders consistently post smart, timely comments about Washington area sports and teams. More about badges | Request a badge
Culture Connoisseur Badge Culture Connoisseurs consistently offer thought-provoking, timely comments on the arts, lifestyle and entertainment. More about badges | Request a badge
Fact Checker Badge Fact Checkers contribute questions, information and facts to The Fact Checker. More about badges | Request a badge
Washingtologist Badge Washingtologists consistently post thought-provoking, timely comments on events, communities, and trends in the Washington area. More about badges | Request a badge
Post Writer Badge This commenter is a Washington Post editor, reporter or producer.
Post Forum Badge Post Forum members consistently offer thought-provoking, timely comments on politics, national and international affairs. More about badges | Request a badge
Weather Watcher Badge Weather Watchers consistently offer thought-provoking, timely comments on climates and forecasts. More about badges | Request a badge
World Watcher Badge World Watchers consistently offer thought-provoking, timely comments on international affairs. More about badges | Request a badge
Post Contributor Badge This commenter is a Washington Post contributor. Post contributors arent staff, but may write articles or columns. In some cases, contributors are sources or experts quoted in a story. More about badges | Request a badge
Post Recommended Washington Post reporters or editors recommend this comment or reader post.
You must be logged in to report a comment. Sign in here
You must be logged in to recommend a comment. Sign in here
Comments our editors find particularly useful or relevant are displayed in Top Comments, as are comments by users with these badges: . Replies to those posts appear here, as well as posts by staff writers.All comments are posted in the All Comments tab. More about badgesGet a badge
To pause and restart automatic updates, click "Live" or "Paused". If paused, you'll be notified of the number of additional comments that have come in.
Comments our editors find particularly useful or relevant are displayed in Top Comments, as are comments by users with these badges: . Replies to those posts appear here, as well as posts by staff writers.
Spam Offensive Disagree Off-Topic
Among the criteria for featured comments: likes by users, replies by users, previous history of valuable commenting, and selection by moderators.
Facebook
Twitter
Reddit
StumbleUpon
Digg
Delicious
Most Read
1
84 Lumber and the big-budget Super Bowl ad to nowhere
2
These smart TVs were apparently spying on their owners
3
Hundreds of current, former EPA employees urge Senate to reject Trumps nominee for the agency
4
Trump aides might be considering a major change to the presidents maternity leave plan
5
Trumps energy plan doesnt mention solar, an industry that just added 51,000 jobs
Market Watch
DJIA -0.09% NASDAQ -0.06%
Get quote
Last Update: 02/07/2017(DJIA&NASDAQ;)
Our Online Games
Play right from this page
Mahjongg Dimensions
Strategy game
Spider Solitaire
Card game
Mahjongg Candy
Strategy game
Word Wipe
Word game
business
wonkblog
Success! Check your inbox for details.
Please enter a valid email address
You might also like:
Sign Up No Thanks
See all newsletters
washingtonpost.com  1996-2017 The Washington Post  Help and Contact Us Terms of Service Privacy Policy Print Products Terms of Sale Digital Products Terms of Sale Submissions and Discussion Policy RSS Terms of Service Ad Choices
Close video player
Now Playing
Read content from allstate
Content from Allstate
This content is paid for by an advertiser and published by WP BrandStudio. The Washington Post newsroom was not involved in the creation of this content. Learn more about WP BrandStudio.
We went to the source. Heres what matters to millennials. A state-by-state look at where Generation Y stands on the big issues.