GMO Foods - Truth About Genetically Modified Food
GMO Foods
Menu
Skip to content
HomeContact Us
GMO Foods What are we eating?
Ever hear of GMO  genetically modified organisms? A lot of you are most likely wondering what these are or have never even heard of them. These GMO are in products where the genetic makeup has been altered through genetic engineering. Many Americans including myself are concerned about the spread of genetically modified organisms throughout agriculture, and the fact that there is no current requirement in this country for labeling of GMO foods.
Since the 1990s world agriculture and food production has undergone the most radical transformation in history. With very little public awareness, in just a few short years GMO foods have come to dominate both global agriculture and supermarket shelf space.
Im not a scientist and not an authority on agriculture. However, I do care about what is in the foods I eat and I think most of you agree and want to know what youre eating, as well.
In September 2012 French scientists conclude FIRST EVER long-term study of GMO on rats; extensive research PROVING GMO CORN causes horrific tumors in rats, killing 70 percent of females early, long before their average two-year life expectancy. The study which was published in the peer-reviewed journal Food and Chemical Toxicology, revealed for the first time that rats fed Monsantos NK603 GM corn treated with Roundup (glyphosate) herbicide for longer than 90 days developed deadly tumors at a much higher, and much quicker, rate than rats not exposed to these products.
The American Academy of Environmental Medicine has warned of serious health risks indicated by animal studies measuring the effects of GMO foods. Some medical experts have suggested that Morgellons disease, a mysterious disease that produces sores, rashes, and sharp fibers beneath the skin, may be linked with genetically modified organisms.
The side effects of long term GMO food consumption include kidney cancer, prostate cancer, liver cancer, colon cancer, breast cancer (for men too), thyroid tumors, brain tumors, Parkinsons disease, infertility, birth defects, and autism. In over 260 studies worldwide, the diagnosis of cancer has been linked to agrochemicals.Yet GMO foods proponents claim that it poses no harm to humans or the environment, and that we need the technology to feed the worlds growing population. But United Nations have not embraced GMOs as a way to feed a hungry world, proposing instead more sustainable agriculture methods.
Most VACCINES AND FLU SHOTS contain GMO ingredients. Chemotherapy (AKA agent orange) is pushed on the masses as a viable treatment for people who have been steadily consuming pesticide, fluoride, bleach, aspartame, MSG and GMO. Most developed nations do not consider GMOs to be safe. In nearly 50 countries around the world including Australia, Japan, and all of the countries in the European union, there are significant restrictions or outright bans on the production and sale of GMO foods.
Our Federal Food and Drug Administration ( I have heard people refer to them as the fraud and deception agency) has denied requests to mandate labeling, saying there is no evidence of the GMO foods/ products being unsafe. But many of us are begging the question, if there is no public threat, then what is the harm in labeling it as such? And why are so many companies battling against the labeling of food that has GMO? Heres a small list of the companies that have publicly admitted they oppose labeling for GMO: PepsiCo, Sunny Delight Beverages, Mars, General Mills, Hormel, Healthy Choice and J.M. Smucker Co.
Even if the FDA allows the food industry to continue to use genetically engineered ingredients, that doesnt mean that we have to eat them if we dont want to. But we need a mandate on labeling so we know what foods have GMO. Many states are considering legislation that would require labeling of all GMO foods/products. But, such requirements should be issued by the FDA on a national scale, not piecemeal by individual states.
While the effectiveness and safety of GMO foods is still being debated, the public must get involved and not cocede the outcome to a small number of profit-driven biotechnology corporations, scientists, and federal officials.
A THREE-TIERED APPROACH TO PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION:
Drink spring water: if you dont trust plastic bottles due to bisphenol/BPA, just find natural springs near where you live. (http://www.findaspring.com/)
Eat only Certified Organic food or grow your own.
Eat superfoods. (http://www.raw-wisdom.com/organic)
Also here are three ways you can determine if some foods have GMO. (1) Look at the price lookup code, or PLU code, on produce. The PLU code for conventionally grown produce starts with a 4 and is a string of four numbers. The PLU code for genetically modified produce starts with a 8 and is almost always a string of five numbers, while the PLU code for organic produce starts with a 9 and is always a string of five numbers. (2) Examine the nutrition label for Corn, Canola oil, Soy, and Cottonseed in the ingredients section. These four ingredients are almost always genetically modified. (3) Look for GMO Free or 100% Organic labels on food.
Remember, knowledge is power, and no person or organization can ever take it away from you. Remember that the body is the temple of the soul and YOU ARE WHAT YOU EAT, so treat it that way. Otherwise, if youre still considering a GMO food diet or regimen, be sure and ask your doctor if CANCER is right for you.
For more information click here
Proudly powered by WordPress