Top 10 Worst GMO Foods for Your GMO Foods List | Natural Society
Weight Loss
Cold & Flu
GMOs
Monsanto
Fitness
Cancer
Positive News
Home
News
Everyday health
Current events
Good News
GMOs
Nutrition
Newsletter
About Natural Society
Contact
Shop
Top 10 Worst GMO Foods for Your GMO Foods List
by Elizabeth Renter
Posted on July 28, 2012
Tweet
Genetically modified foods (GMO foods) have been shown to cause harm to humans, animals, and the environment, and despite growing opposition, more and more foods continue to be genetically altered. Its important to note that steering clear of these foods completely may be difficult, and you should merely try to find other sources than your big chain grocer.If produce is certified USDA-organic, its non-GMO (or supposed to be!) Also, seek out local farmers and booths at farmers markets where you can be ensured that the crops arent GMO. Even better, if you are so inclined: Start organic gardening and grow them yourself.Until then, here arethe top 10 worst GMO foods for your do not eat GMO foods list.
GMO Foods List: Top 10 Worst Foods
1.Corn
One of the most prominent GMO foods, avoiding corn is a no-brainer. If youve watched any food documentary, you know corn is highly modified. As many as half of all U.S. farms growing corn for Monsanto are using genetically modified corn, and much of it is intended for human consumption. Monsantos GMO corn has been tied to numerous health issues, including weight gain and organ disruption.
2.Soy
Found in tofu, vegetarian products, soybean oil, soy flour, and numerous other products, soy is also modified to resist herbicides.As of now, biotech giant Monsanto still has a tight grasp on the soybean market, with approximately 90 percent of soy being genetically engineered to resist Monsantos herbicide Roundup. In one single year, 2006, there was 96.7 million pounds of glyphosate sprayed on soybeans alone.
3.Sugar
According to NaturalNews, genetically-modified sugar beets were introduced to the U.S. market in 2009. Like others, theyve been modified by Monsanto to resist herbicides. Monsanto has even had USDA and court-related issues with the planting of its sugarbeets, being ordered to remove seeds from the soil due to illegal approval.
4.Aspartame
Aspartame is a toxic additive used in numerous food products, and should be avoided for numerous reasons, including the fact that it is created with genetically modified bacteria.
5.Papayas
This one may come as a surprise to all of you tropical-fruit lovers. GMO papayas have been grown in Hawaii for consumption since 1999. Though they cant be sold to countries in the European Union, they are welcome with open arms in the U.S. and Canada.
6.Canola
One of the most chemically altered foods in the U.S. diet, canola oil is obtained from rapeseed through a series of chemical actions.
7.Cotton
Found in cotton oil, cotton originating in India and China in particular has serious risks.
8.Dairy
Your dairy products may contain growth hormones, since as many as one-fifth of all dairy cows in America are pumped with these hormones. In fact, Monasntos health-hazardous rBGH has been banned in 27 countries, but is still in most US cows. If you must drink milk, buy organic.
9. and 10. Zucchini and Yellow Squash
Closely related, these two squash varieties are modified to resist viruses.
The dangers of some of these foods are well-known. The Bt toxin being used in GMO corn, for example, was recently detected in the blood of pregnant women and their babies. But perhaps more frightening are the risks that are still unknown. Even while these foods should be on your GMO foods list so that they are avoided, you can buy 100% organic to be safest.
With little regulation and safety tests performed by the companies doing the genetic modifications themselves, we have no way of knowing for certain what risks these lab-created foods pose to us outside of what we already know.
The best advice: steer clear of them altogether.
Additional Sources:
NaturalNews
Other Popular Stories:
Glyphosate, Most Widely Used Weed Killer, Still Isnt Killing Weeds
Exposure to Certain Foods in Infancy May Prevent Future Allergies
Previous PostNext Post
Get The NaturalSociety Natural Health Newsletter!
Get the latest key natural health information from NaturalSociety with our daily newsletter, and receive three free health guides and one full length E-book!
Newsletter
Follow
Natural Society
Essential Stories
A Proposed Trial of GMO Mosquitoes Divided Voters in Florida
Julie Fidler
November 15, 2016
Citizens in These 3 US States Took Action on Water Fluoridation Bans
Julie Fidler
November 15, 2016
More California Residents Vote to Ban GMOs
Julie Fidler
November 14, 2016
Improve Your Health by Doing This for 30 Minutes
Julie Fidler
November 7, 2016
UNICEF: 300 Million Kids are Breathing Toxic Air
Julie Fidler
November 3, 2016
USDA Approves 2 New Types of GMO Potatoes
Julie Fidler
November 2, 2016
Check out Natural Society's Polls on LockerDome on LockerDome
Viral Stories
Home Remedies for Hemorrhoids  6 Natural Treatments
16 Magnesium Deficiency Symptoms  Signs of Low Magnesium Levels
Health Benefits of Dates  Promoting Heart, Brain, and Digestive Health
The Numbers on Plastic Bottles: What do Plastic Recycling Symbols Mean?
For a Beautiful Smile: 7 Natural Teeth Whitening Home Remedies
9 Amazing Health Benefits of Chamomile Tea
Home
About Natural Society
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Advertise
Newsletter
Work with Us
Contact
2016 Natural Society. Allrights reserved.
Disclaimer | Privacy Policy