The Facts About GMO
Get the Facts
Our Position on GMOs
Get the Facts on GMOs
Providing consumers with safe products is our number one priority, and we understand that some consumers have questions about genetically modified food ingredients. The use of genetically modified (GM) ingredients is not only safe for people and our planet, but also has a number of important benefits.
Read what Independent Journalists and Experts Are Saying About GM Technology:
Can GMOs Save Our Oranges? (Newsweek)
29-Year Study Of Trillions Of Meals Shows GE Crops Do Not Harm Food-Producing Animals, Humans (Genetic Literacy Project)
EDITORIAL: CSPI: There are legitimate concerns about GMOs, but not around food safety, and labeling would be misleading
EDITORIAL: Fight the GM Food Scare (Scientific American)
EUs Chief Scientist Says Europes GMO Policy Not Supported by Science, Hurts Crop Yields and the Environment
Bill Gates Sets the Record Straight on GMOs (Video)
GMOs Are Safe
Many of the most influential regulatory agencies and organizations that study the safety of the food supply, including the U.S. Food & Drug Administration, the American Medical Association, the World Health Organization, Health Canada, the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the National Academy of Sciences, have found genetically modified food ingredients are safe and there are no negative health effects associated with their use.
Read about the FDAs role in regulating safety of GM foods
Learn what the American Medical Association and other respected authorities have said about GMOs
Bill Gates  Keynote Address at World Food Prize 2009
A Decade of EU-Funded GMO Research
Statement by the American Association for the Advancement of Science On Labeling of Genetically Modified Foods
Statement by the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine
GMOs Are Not New
GM technology has been around for the past 20 years, and today, 70-80% of the foods we eat in the United States, both at home and away from home, contain ingredients that have been genetically modified.
Find out more about genetically modified foods and ingredients in todays marketplace
Findings of the Royal Society of Medicine
Keeping Food Affordable
Ingredients grown using GM technology require fewer pesticides, less water and keep production costs down.
In fact, GM technology helps reduce the price of crops used for food, such as corn, soybeans and sugar beets by as much as 15-30%.
Read more about how GM technology helps keep food prices low
Lessons from the California GM Labeling Proposition on the
State of Crop Biotechnology
Why labeling of GMOs is actually bad for people and the environment
Time To Stop Worrying About GMOs
Farmers Want To Share Their Reasons For Using GMO Seeds
Protecting Our Environment
GM technology allows farmers to use fewer chemicals, such as pesticides.
It also helps them utilize more environmentally friendly planting techniques that cut down on soil erosion, greenhouse gas emissions and water use.
In the US, adoption of GM crops resulted in pesticide use reduction of 46.4 million pounds in 2003.
Globally, crop biotechnology has reduced pesticide spraying (1996-2011) by 9 percent or 976 million pounds.
Learn how GM technology helps to protect the environment
EUs Chief Scientist Says Europes GMO Policy Not Supported by Science, Hurts Crop Yields and the Environment
United States Secretary of State John Kerry on GMO Benefits
Feeding the World's Hungry
One in eight people among the worlds growing population of seven billion do not have enough to eat, and safe and effective methods of food production, like crops produced through GM technology, can help us feed the hungry and malnourished in developing nations around the world.
Find out how GMO crops are helping us feed the world
Increased Crop Yields
The Golden Rice Project
The Gates Foundation and Farming First
GM Bananas
African Agriculture
Impact on Food Prices
United States Secretary of State John Kerry on GMO Benefits
Julie Borlaug says biotech is necessary in fight against hunger
Learn About A Federal Labeling Solution
A Project of The Grocery Manufacturers Association, 1350 I Street, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20005