Genetically Modified Foods | Natural Society
Weight Loss
Cold & Flu
GMOs
Monsanto
Fitness
Cancer
Positive News
Home
News
Everyday health
Current events
Good News
GMOs
Nutrition
Newsletter
About Natural Society
Contact
Shop
Genetically Modified Foods
Genetically modified foods are made upof organisms (known as GMOs for genetically modified organisms) which have been genetically altered for improvement. Biotechnology giant Monsanto is the primary maker of genetically modified seeds, responsible for 90 percent of the genetically engineered seed on the United States market.
The touted reasons for genetically modifying foods vary from making a fruit larger and seedless to resisting pesticides, herbicides, and insecticides. Millions of dollars are invested in this bioengineering process annually by many, withBill Gatesmost notably investing into Monsanto with 500,000 shares. But are GMO foods really the solution to humanitys problems, or are they negatively affecting virtually all life on planet earth?
Genetically modified foods have been proven not only to be unhealthy, but also deadly. Onereview of 19 studiesshowed that with the consumption of genetically modified foods comes significant organ disruptions, especially in the liver and kidneys. Whats more, however, is that the damage posed by Monsantos GMO creations extend even further than public health. In fact, they threaten the environment as a whole. This is perhaps the most concerning effect of GMOs.
Monsanto has created GMO crops that contain something known as Bt, which is a toxin incorporated into the crops with the intention of killing off insects. The usage of the Bt biopesticide within these GMO crops, however, has actually led to mutant insect populations which are directly resistant to the biopesticide. Reports state that at least 8 insect populations have developed resistance,with 2 populations resistant to Bt sprays and at least 6 species resistant to Bt crops as a whole. As a result, farmers must spray even more pesticides!
Beyond GM seeds and the Bt pesticide, Monsanto is also the creator of the best-selling herbicide Roundup. The usage of Roundup has spawned over 120 million hectacres of herbicide-resistant superweeds that have destroyed the farmland in which they reside. In addition, much of the soil has also been damaged. Even in the face of these statistics, Monsanto continues to disregard any and all warning signs.
Genetically modified foods present a very real threat to the genetic integrity of both humankind and the environment, and require vigorous longterm research before being unleashed on the public. That is why nations like Peru, France, and Hungary are taking action against Monsanto and GMOs over legitimate health concerns.
Newsletter
Follow
Natural Society
Essential Stories
Your Tap Water Is Likely Contaminated with Industrial Chemicals
Julie Fidler
These 7 Turmeric Brands are Being Recalled Due to Lead Contamiantion
Anna Scanlon
DEA Says Marijuana Will Remain Illegal at the Federal Level
Julie Fidler
This is Absolutely Key to Being Immune to Stress
Julie Fidler
McDonalds Makes Positive Food Changes Due to Demand for Healthy Food
Julie Fidler
Wendys Plans to Eliminate Antibiotics from Chicken Production in 2017
Julie Fidler
Check out Natural Society's Polls on LockerDome on LockerDome
Viral Stories
Marijuana Kills Cancer Cells, Admits the U.S. National Cancer Institute
Home Remedies for Hemorrhoids  6 Natural Treatments
Home Remedies for Gout  12 Natural Solutions
16 Magnesium Deficiency Symptoms  Signs of Low Magnesium Levels
Health Benefits of Dates  Promoting Heart, Brain, and Digestive Health
9 Amazing Health Benefits of Chamomile Tea
Home
About Natural Society
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Advertise
Newsletter
Work with Us
Contact
2016 Natural Society. Allrights reserved.
Disclaimer | Privacy Policy