GMO news, articles and information:
HomeAbout NaturalNewsContact UsWrite for NaturalNewsMedia InfoAdvertise with Natural News
GMO news, articles and information:
Tweet
Pin It
Now we know why non-GMO foods are saturated with glyphosate weedkiller... even wheat bread and oats4/28/2016 - The recent news that a number of non-GMO foods were found to be saturated with glyphosate weedkiller caught many people by surprise and left a lot of us wondering exactly how this could happen.
As reported on April 20 by Mike Adams, the Health Ranger, on Natural News, a sample of the Strawberries...Pro-Monsanto Bill Nye the 'science guy' says GMOs are awesome and climate change skeptics should be thrown in prison... yeah, really4/23/2016 - Celebrity scientists such as Neil deGrasse Tyson, Michio Kaku and Bill Nye keep their careers afloat by embracing mainstream scientific theories and presenting them to the public in a reassuring show-biz manner  and not by applying any real criticalal thought themselves.
You don't get invited...EXCLUSIVE: Quaker instant oatmeal and Silk non-GMO soy creamer found contaminated with alarming levels of glyphosate weed killer... and they're not even GMO!4/20/2016 - According to glyphosate laboratory testing conducted at Microbe Inotech Laboratories, Inc., in St. Louis, the Quaker Instant Oatmeal (Strawberries and Cream) sample tested at the lab contains an astonishing 1,327.1 ppb (parts per billion) of glyphosate weed killer.
The test results, achieved via...USDA announces it will stop regulating all GMO crops altered with CRISPR gene editing technique... Frankenfood tidal wave about to be unleashed4/17/2016 - If you think our genetic food chain has been royally screwed up by big bio-ag's like Monsanto and Syngenta, and massively over-processed by Big Food, things are just about to get a whole lot worse, and what's more, our own government is doing it to us  yet again.
As reported by Business Insider,...Mars, Inc., announces it will clearly label all GMOs on its products4/12/2016 - Over the last few weeks, there has been several amazing announcements from food giants that are seen as a step in the right direction by those who are trying to live a healthy, GMO-free lifestyle.
General Mills caved into the mounting public pressure to clearly label its foods GMO; Campbell's promised...Big Food says they will label GMOs...
But is there more to the story?4/11/2016 - The world's largest food corporations have spent hundreds of millions of dollars[1] (some of it illegally[2]) to avoid being required to label the genetically engineered[3] (GMOs) ingredients in their products. (Story by Katherine Paul and Ronnie Cummins, republished...The organic movement needs YOU to help spread awareness of organic agriculture vs. GMO4/10/2016 - Over the last 20 years, the agricultural industry has slowly and inconspicuously introduced genetically modified organisms (GMOs) to the world, dominating the market in just a few short years, while the majority of the public stays mostly uniformed.
Following Paul Berg's 1971 gene-splicing experiment,...General Mills to start labeling GM foods nationwide... after being forced to do so4/8/2016 - After years of public opposition, General Mills has finally caved and will start labeling all its products which contain GMOs.
The decision wasn't made out of the goodness of General Mills' heart, however. The company has a history of actively opposing GMO labeling. In the past, General Mills donated...Tidal wave of food manufacturers switching to sunflower oil to avoid toxic GMO corn, soy and canola oils4/6/2016 - In an effort to avoid the health-harming problems caused by GMO soy, corn and canola oils, food manufacturers are turning to the cleaner, non-GMO benefits of sunflower oil. Furthermore, sunflower oil is void of trans fats, another plus when it comes to maintaining good health.
Of course, by now we're...Experimental GMO crops sprouting up across America, while USDA, the overseeing agency, takes 'industry-friendly approach'4/1/2016 - Experimental crops genetically engineered to withstand high doses of pesticides are growing all over the U.S., and in some cases illegally. However, rarely does the biotech industry suffer repercussions, as the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), the agency responsible for oversight, largely ignores...USDA claims to support GMO labeling, but only wants companies to list a phone number or scan code, not actual words3/31/2016 - The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is using a policy sleight of hand to appear as though it supports listing genetically modified ingredients in foods, but without actually requiring them to be spelled out.
As reported by Agriculture.com in recent days, the USDA Secretary Tom Vilsack has indeed...GMO foods were never approved by the FDA!3/29/2016 - How could it be that genetically modified foods were never approved by the FDA, yet they infiltrate nearly all staple crops across the USA? For 25 years, Americans have been consuming common foods like corn, soy and canola that contain bacteria from insects and insecticides that kill bugs and worms,...Frankenfood industry now in total panic over Vermont's tough GMO labeling law; General Mills announces surrender3/29/2016 - In order to comply with Vermont's GMO food labeling law set to go into effect in July 2016, General Mills has announced that they'll begin to label products of theirs which contain genetically modified ingredients. The company's decision also comes in the wake of the recent Senate vote that struck down...Putin: Human evolution under big threat from GMOs, vaccines3/27/2016 - Those who support vaccine choice and oppose genetically modifying our food chain have an unlikely ally: Russian President Vladimir Putin.
As reported by the Health Freedom Alliance, a report that was prepared by the Russian Security Council (SCRF), a report which is currently circulating within the...Ted Cruz is another Monsanto shill3/25/2016 - During a recent agricultural summit in Iowa, the fact that Ted Cruz chose to use the words "anti-science" and "zealot" to describe his stance on GMO, actually supports the fact that he is already BOUGHT by biotech, the most evil industry on the planet  which inserts cancer-causing herbicides...Warning: Monsanto's GMO soy could give you blue balls!3/24/2016 - Bringing new meaning to the term blue balls, a study has shown that eating a diet containing genetically modified soy actually caused the testicles of rats to turn blue.
The study is just one of many cited in a report by the Institute for Responsible Technology reviewing research on the potential...GMO food 'safety' testing exposed as a corporate-run science fraud3/24/2016 - Genetically modified (GM) food may be one of the biggest frauds in science and will definitely not feed the world or improve our farming techniques. On average, 80 percent of most American staple foods is genetically modified to some degree.
GMOs have long been part of a daily routine for Jonathan...Ketchum PR Firm now pitching services to organic food companies after long history of pushing biotech propaganda3/23/2016 - For decades, the public relations firm Ketchum has worked vigorously to discredit, destroy and dismantle the organic food industry, sustainable farming practices and environmental activism. Ketchum has been enlisted by some of the world's largest industries to manipulate consumers and government policy,...General Mills surrenders to GMO labeling, reluctantly decides to label foods but still believes in fundamentally deceiving its own customers3/21/2016 - General Mills, a highly unethical food corporation that bitterly fought against labeling GMOs in California and Oregon, has now surrendered to Vermont's labeling laws and announced it will start labeling GMOs across the country.
"General Mills has announced it will start labeling products with genetically...Depopulation globalist Bill Gates investing in meat alternatives made with toxic ingredients like GMO canola oil3/18/2016 - A new era of fake, toxic meats is upon us. While tofu, seitan and veggie burgers have been around for ages to satisfy the growing vegetarian and vegan community, in the last few years the food industry has been on a mission to win the hearts of the health-conscious carnivore, too.
According to the...Oregon senator introduces national GMO-labeling law, urges FDA to work with food companies to uniformly label GMOs3/18/2016 - Consumer demand for clean, healthy, and non-GMO foods has gained unstoppable momentum, causing a major blow to the agrichemical industry, which relies heavily on genetically altered crops and millions of tons of toxic pesticides.
Though seed giants like Monsanto and DuPont, as well Big Food companies...DARK Act defeated in U.S. Senate as lawmakers receive tidal wave of calls from angry food consumers who are tired of being LIED to about GMO in their food3/16/2016 - The DARK Act was defeated in the U.S. Senate today, achieving a massive victory for consumers and also for the Environmental Working Group, which helped organize large-scale opposition to the bill.
The DARK Act would have outlawed state-level GMO labeling laws nationwide, condemning American food...Ted Cruz just got slaughtered at the polls after declaring his support for Monsanto; pro-GMO Republican establishment now in state of total collapse3/16/2016 - Republican presidential hopeful Ted Cruz suffered nationwide devastating defeats at the polls just one day after denouncing health-conscious Americans as "anti-science zealots" for their opposition to GMOs. In a shameless endorsement of agrichemical giant Monsanto during an Iowa speech, Cruz made it...How Monsanto hijacked a science journal in an attempt to destroy scientific research linking GMOs and glyphosate to horrific cancer tumors3/16/2016 - Another skeleton is coming out of Monsanto's closet, and its implication will forever change how we view the relationship between corporations, scientific literature and government regulators. The infamous corporation is now being exposed for hijacking a science journal to suppress the facts that their...GMO truths totally exposed in new book available now in a condensed format: Give this to everyone you know!3/16/2016 - As most NaturalNews readers are aware, we have always done our best to expose the harmful effects genetically modified organisms and foods (GMOs) have on both humans and the environment. And we will continue to publish the truth about GMOs, and why they should be shunned.
But a newly condensed book...Ted Cruz goes all-in for Monsanto; insults tens of millions of health-conscious Americans by calling them 'anti science zealots'3/15/2016 - U.S. presidential candidate and Texas senator Ted Cruz went all-in for Monsanto on the campaign trail in Iowa, parroting Monsanto's propaganda by proclaiming that GMOs are feeding the world while insulting health-conscious consumers by equating support of GMO labeling with "anti-science zealotry."
At...DARK Act 2.0 now being cooked up by the U.S. Senate to blind consumers to the truth about GMO3/11/2016 - When Mike Pompeo (R-KS) and G.K. Butterfield (D-NC) introduced the "Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2014" to Congress, they were nefariously supported by the Grocery Manufacturers Association (GMA) and the Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO).
However, they didn't have the backing of...Oregon passes mandatory GMO labeling bill for transgenic salmon3/9/2016 - Mankind has irrevocably altered the natural ecosystem. We've polluted the oceans, the atmosphere and the soil, we've cut down rainforests and sought to conquer even the most inhospitable of places on Earth. When it seemed that it couldn't get any worse, Murphy's Law showed us otherwise. We started playing...US-grown GMO corn and soy can't even get into other countries because they're considered unsafe to eat3/8/2016 - Just one day after much of the world celebrated Valentine's Day this year, the nation of Russia enacted an embargo on all imports of corn and soy products originating in the U.S., say reports. Following through with promises earlier made in defiance of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), Russian...Food tyranny to become federal policy as DARK Act threatens to censor all GMO labeling nationwide ... Take action!3/8/2016 - While many health-conscious Americans are in favor of having their foods labeled so they know whether or not they're eating genetically-modified items, there are people determined to keep citizens in the dark about what they ingest. Appropriately referred to as the DARK (Deny Americans the Right to...One third of patients enter the hospital malnourished, and it all goes downhill from there3/8/2016 - According to registered dietitians at Gottlieb Memorial Hospital of Loyola University Health System, poor patient "outcomes" and longer hospital stays are that end results of patients entering the hospital malnourished, and it's being classified as a disorder!
So then, what happens when you are stuck...The DARK Act is BACK: Defend your human right to know what you're eating!3/7/2016 - Unambiguous, clear and complete food labels are an ethical responsibility that rests on the shoulders of the manufacturer, retail seller and local administration. Acknowledging this duty is a crucial step because, when you're in charge of the food that people eat, you have a direct impact on their health....Taxpayer-subsidized corn industry spread blatant disinformation, falsely claiming GMO labeling would raise food prices3/6/2016 - Enough already, anti-GMO-labeling people. Really.
The bottom line is that everyone has the right to know what's in the food they're about to eat, so why the relentless attempts to try to keep such efforts at bay?
One such insane attempt was recently demonstrated by the Corn Refiners Association...Senate set to vote on DARK Act TODAY, bill would criminalize any and all claims that say non-GMO food is safer3/3/2016 2:17:39 PM - A piece of legislation that would prohibit states from enacting GMO-labeling laws, as well as make it difficult for companies wishing to voluntarily label GMOs, is expected to hit the Senate floor for a vote today. The Senate vote has been dreaded by the Right to Know movement ever since it passed the...Millions for GMO propaganda: the amount of money spent to keep you in the DARK will astound you3/3/2016 - What is it about a requirement to label foods containing genetically modified ingredients that so scares the food industry that they would do anything to prevent that from happening? Why are Big Agriculture and biotech giants like Monsanto so hell-bent on keeping you in the dark about what's in the...Latest Bill Gates GMO mad science scheme: paying students $900 to be human experiments for genetically modified bananas3/3/2016 - A controversial research trial involving the testing of GMO bananas on humans is likely to proceed, despite public outcry and a petition with nearly 60,000 signatures from those who question its safety.
The "transgenic feeding study" is planned to take place at Iowa State University, under the sponsorship...Secretive food industry jeopardizing public's right to information3/2/2016 - I just don't get it.
Over the more than 20 years I have worked as a business journalist, I've always been motivated by a simple premise: Knowledge is power, and that power belongs with the public. The spread of information that people can use to make decisions  what to buy, what to eat, where...Passage of DARK Act to outlaw GMO labeling nationwide is now imminent... TAKE ACTION now or forever lose your right to know what you're eating2/29/2016 - In the latest insult to scientific transparency and food consumers everywhere, the U.S. Congress is pushing hard to pass the DARK Act that would outlaw all mandatory GMO labeling nationwide.
This act of outrageous food secrecy is being pushed by Monsanto and the evil biotech industry. It's the latest...Bogus study authored by former Monsanto worker claims GMO animal feed is safe2/25/2016 - A new study published in the Journal of Animal Science claims to have finally settled the debate over whether or not genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are safe for animals: They are, it alleges. But the study's main author is a former research scientist for Monsanto, and a current specialist promoting...These two top 'science' journals rejected an ad by Dr. Bronner because it detailed true facts about GMOs2/18/2016 - Dr. Bronner's Magic Soaps, a company started by a third-generation master soapmaker, produces all-natural soaps using high-quality ingredients like organic essential oils, natural vitamin E extract from sunflower seeds and citric acid. No chelating agents, dyes, whiteners or synthetic fragrances are...How the mainstream media act as shameless shills for the biotech industry2/16/2016 - One of the main reasons the general public doesn't know enough about all the harmful effects of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) - foods, seeds and otherwise - is because they have not been adequately reported by the mainstream media. Alternative health and news sites like ours have, in fact, proliferated...Hershey introduces GMO-free chocolate after dropping transgenic sugar beets from ingredients2/11/2016 - Citing consumer discomfort with genetically modified organisms (GMOs), Hershey has begun to transition its sugar sourcing away from GMO sugar beets, and toward non-GMO sugarcane.
"More than three-quarters of the sugar we are using today is cane sugar  and as we get into 2016, our expectation...ANALYSIS: Which 2016 presidential candidates will take a stand against the evil GMO biotech industry?2/10/2016 - Which 2016 presidential candidates are aligned with the biotech criminals and GMOs? Which candidates oppose GMOs or support GMO labeling?
That's the subject of my latest podcast, which takes a hard look at the GMO position of all the top candidates: Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton, Ted Cruz, Bernie...New report probes pro-GMO journalists2/10/2016 - On September 23rd of last year, Washington Post food columnist Tamar Haspel admitted to receiving "plenty" of money from pro-agrichemical industry sources. (Story by Gary Ruskin, republished from USRTK.org.)
Following her admission, I thought it might be useful to report on journalists  including...Heinz GMO ketchup banned by Israel for containing too much HFCS, not enough tomatoes2/8/2016 - Heinz, the well-known family favorite ketchup brand, has been banned in Israel because it does not contain enough tomato solids. Israel's health ministry has said that it does not contain enough paste to be classed as ketchup.
The decision came after the biggest ketchup rival in Israel launched a...Zika virus outbreak linked to release of genetically engineered mosquitoes... disastrous unintended consequences now threaten life across the Americas2/1/2016 - GMO skeptics like myself have been warning for years of the unintended consequences of genetic pollution. Even when genetically engineered organisms are released into the world with the best of intentions, such actions can wreak havoc on the ecosystem and human civilization in ways that simply can't...Grain terminal in North Dakota 100% dedicated to non-GMO harvests1/28/2016 - In a move that further reinforces the wave of health-consciousness that's sweeping the nation, a newly-acquired North Dakota grain terminal has its sights set on creating and maintaining a fully non-GMO facility.
Captain Drake, LLC's million-bushel grain terminal, is addressing the growing demand...EU chief scientist says precaution is 'irrelevant' regarding GMOs; gets called a 'dangerous imbecile' by Risk Engineering expert1/26/2016 - After EU chief scientist Anne Glover stated in an interview that genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are so safe that the precautionary principle is "irrelevant," noted risk engineering expert Nassim Nicholas Taleb of New York University shot back, calling her a "dangerous imbecile."
"There are...Russian group launches large-scale, long-term GMO safety study to test Monsanto's transgenic corn1/26/2016 - A study that is estimated to cost $25 million, run over the course of three years and experiment on thousands of rats by feeding them Monsanto genetically modified maize and the herbicide it's made with is in the works, expected to go into full swing in 2015.
The reason behind the need for the long-term...Whole Foods GMO labeling countdown just two years away ... Retailer promised all products would be labeled with GMO content by 20181/21/2016 - Time has a funny way of creeping up on us. We know that all too well when birthdays and various anniversaries come up, sometimes surprising us with "where has the time gone?" thoughts. Well, we imagine it's going to be about the same for Whole Foods Market. After all, 2018, the year in which they declared...Monsanto has terminated 16% of its workforce in recent months, as demand for GMO crops continues to plummet (and organics skyrocket!)1/20/2016 - Those opposed to GM agriculture in favor of healthy, organic food have a lot to celebrate as we enter the new year. It's just been announced that Monsanto plans to eliminate another 1,000 jobs, in addition to the 2,600 it slashed last fall, resulting in a 16 percent decrease in its total workforce.
Meanwhile,...Biotech shills continue spouting lies to push GMO imperialism1/14/2016 - When it comes to food science research, the most common debates are about science and which sources or studies are correct, or more legitimate. Fact checking and deciphering which studies are biased and which ones aren't can be exhausting as well as confusing. However, sometimes the truth is blatant.
An...Campbell's Soup Co. announces GMO labeling for its food products, supports mandatory GMO labeling and consumers' right to know1/13/2016 - A big THANK YOU goes out to Campbell's Soup Company for taking a step in the right direction and announcing GMO labeling for all their food products. All ingredients in Campbell's food products that contain genetically modified organisms will now be labeled. It's still unclear whether the labels will...Campbell's calls for nationwide mandatory GMO labeling, revokes support for anti-labeling front groups run by biotech mafia1/12/2016 - Campbell's just made food history. It announced support for nationwide GMO labeling while revoking its support for biotech front groups that oppose GMO labeling ballot initiatives at the state level.
In an announcement on its website, Campbell's CEO Denise Morrison threw down the gauntlet, declaring...Monsanto's whored-out journalists exposed: Amy Harmon, Keith Kloor, Tamar Haspel and more1/12/2016 - Connecting the dots between the writers of pro-agrichemical pseudo-journalistic pieces and the funding that fuels their endless propaganda isn't always easy work. But thanks to the efforts of the U.S. Right to Know group, which advocates for mandatory labeling of genetically modified organisms (GMOs),...Stacking GMO traits causes unpredictable, dangerous gene expressions ignored by regulators1/11/2016 - The World Health Organization (WHO) is getting real about GMOs and coming out about the dangers of the world's most popular herbicide chemical -- glyphosate. The International Agency for Research on Cancer, which reports to WHO, is finally reporting that Monsanto's glyphosate is "probably carcinogenic...BREAKING: Taiwan bans GMOs from school lunches... mandates GMO labeling nationwide... throws down gauntlet on toxic foods from USA and Monsanto1/10/2016 - Even as the fascist, corrupt U.S. government and its regulators (FDA and USDA) actively conspire with the biotech industry to poison Americans with genetically modified foods, Taiwan has already passed and implemented a nationwide law to protect its citizens from GMOs.
Nearly a full year ago, Taiwan...Monsanto emails reveal coercion of university scientists to advertise harmful GMO products1/8/2016 - More evidence has emerged proving that chemical giant Monsanto is anything but neutral when it comes to presenting the facts about Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). A series of secret emails between Monsanto employees and various university scientists reveal that, regardless of whether or not money...Bill Nye now the corporate fraud science guy1/4/2016 - Bill Nye has just joined with Monsanto to push GMOs. He's basically recanted all of his former warnings about GMOs, even though for years he used to question -- and urged others to do the same -- what was in his food. His change of heart stems from a meeting he had with the folks at Monsanto.
Now,...Natural News announces recipients of the 2015 Media Fail Awards1/1/2016 - Where you get your news determines, to a large extent, what you ultimately end up believing about the world around you. If your favorite newspaper or cable news channel is sold out to pharmaceutical and vaccine interests, you're unlikely to get the honest truth about alternative medicine, for instance,...Natural News announces recipients of the 2015 Corrupt Journalist Awards12/31/2015 - In recent days, Natural News published the names of the 2015 Journalist Courage Awards to recognize some of the country's most innovative and fearless investigative journalists dedicated to honest reporting. Conversely, today we announce the names of journalistic hacks, phonies, charlatans and frauds...Natural News announces recipients of the 2015 Bad Science Awards12/30/2015 - Not even a day seems to go by anymore without some whack job in academia, a public health department or even the entertainment industry spewing pseudoscientific nonsense in defense of vaccines, pharmaceuticals or government-run healthcare. And the year 2015 was notably saturated with more than its fair...Natural News announces recipients of the 2015 Celebrity Courage Awards12/28/2015 - This past year saw a great number of celebrities who took a stand for liberty, personal responsibility, freedom and truth, and Natural News wanted to take the opportunity to recognize  and salute  them.
Jessica Alba: Ms. Alba believes that clean, GMO-free foods and products are vital...Philippines Supreme Court bans all GMO products from the country in major victory for native farmers12/17/2015 - The regulatory and judicial systems of some countries (like the USA) are clearly infiltrated with industry insiders and corporate operatives. These operatives work their way into positions of government and academia, and even become judges for the Supreme Court. As they rule in the best interests of...GMO industry manipulates the media, public opinion and politics with sleazy tactics, bought science and PR spin, report reveals12/14/2015 - An Oakland-based public interest group has published a new report detailing the extent to which agri-business giants like Monsanto have gone in mounting a public relations campaign aimed at legitimizing and defending genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in our food chain.
In "Seedy Business: What...GMO scientist Seralini vindicated in court ruling against defamatory fraud accusations; Forbes shill Henry Miller named as source of pro-Monsanto, anti-science lies12/13/2015 - In a major victory for scientific truth, a high court in France has ruled that several false accusers, who made repeated efforts to destroy the work of Professor Gilles-Eric Seralini, engaged in defamation. And one of them is now being held legally responsible to pay the price for his crimes.
Marc...Global consensus weighing against GMOs as majority of EU nations ban GMO cultivation12/9/2015 - The clock is ticking ever closer towards a much anticipated end for the world's biotech moguls. These corporate criminals are now being forced to watch their entire corrupt business model unravel, as country after country bans the cultivation of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs)  a synthetic...Million-dollar links between GMO industry and media propaganda revealed12/2/2015 - U.S. Right to Know, a major nonprofit organization working on behalf of consumers to expose food industry fraud and improve food labeling transparency, is under attack for launching an investigation into who runs and funds the powerful pro-GMO public relations machine.
The Guardian (U.K.) recently...Unlabeled GMO salmon coming to a store or restaurant near you: FDA approves Frankenfish despite lack of safety studies11/30/2015 - If that glistening salmon filet in the cold case at the grocery store looks bigger and more ... engineered than normal in 2016, it could be the laboratory version of real salmon grown under AquaBounty Technologies' patented "AquAdvantage" label (which, ironically, won't actually be labeled for consumers),...China banning anti-GMO websites as communist nation attempts to buy GM seed companies for domination of world food supply11/24/2015 - In much the same way the Obama administration attempts to control the narrative and debate in matters of politics, national security and intelligence he doesn't like, the Chinese government is now trying to control the debate over genetically modified (GM) foods and seeds by banning news content sites...How America's food supply has been hijacked by multinational corporations11/24/2015 - Food is a natural human right -- not in the sense that governments should be in charge of providing it for the people, but rather that human beings are endowed with the right and responsibility to grow it for themselves and reap the fruits of their labor, without interference from governments and corporations.
But...Safety assessment standards for GMOs do not exist! Scientist offers $10 million challenge to Monsanto11/18/2015 - One of the brave and the bold, Dr. Shiva Ayyadurai is the newest scientist to stand up to Monsanto. Dr. Shiva says he will give Monsanto a $10 million building that he owns in Cambridge, Massachusetts if the corporation can disprove his statement that there are "no safety assessment standards" for genetically...Professor Seralini honored with Whistleblower Award for bravely exposing dangers of fraudulent GMO science11/15/2015 - Professor Gilles-Eric Seralini, a molecular biologist from the University of Caen in Normandy, France, recently received the 2015 Whistleblower Award for his eye-opening research that demonstrated the toxicity of Monsanto's herbicide Roundup. The award was presented by the Federation of German Scientists...Monsanto GMO facility nearly destroyed in possible arson attempt in France11/14/2015 - A Monsanto research facility in western France suffered major damage from a suspected arson in late October. The fire started in multiple locations, strongly suggesting a deliberate rather than accidental cause.
Investigators were unable to find any electrical problems or other potential causes for...Washington Post columnist admits to spreading GMO propaganda while collecting 'plenty' of money from biotech front groups11/9/2015 - Readers of Natural News know that most mainstream, legacy newspapers pretty much parrot the corporate line on everything from finances to banking to industry and food, especially genetically modified food.
As noted in a recent TruthWiki entry, one reporter who regularly shills for GMOs and profits...ALERT: Syngenta now patenting natural plant foods produced without GMO technology11/6/2015 - Biotech companies such as Syngenta and Monsanto have more on their agendas than simply peddling poisonous GMO Frankenfood technology to us; they want to own and control the entire food supply, both genetically modified and otherwise.
Many people don't know that these agricultural tech giants are...Celebrities against GMOs11/5/2015 - Monsanto has spent a lot of money trying to fight state labeling laws. Despite millions of dollars and deceitful ad campaigns, they haven't been entirely successful. Laws mandating GMO labeling came close to passing in Oregon, California, and Washington. Vermont successfully passed a GMO labeling law,...Meet the top nine shills, hacks, hucksters and charlatans of the biotech industry11/4/2015 - It's time for you to meet some of the best-paid puppets of the chemical-agriculture industrial complex of the USA. The biotech industry in general has a deep-seeded interest in controlling the world's seeds, modifying them by inserting the genes of toxic pesticides and declaring it is the way to save...GMO labeling - Why are we being treated like second class citizens?11/4/2015 - Living a healthy lifestyle is all about making the healthiest choices. But what if the best choice (or the information needed to make the best choice) wasn't available to you because the people tasked with looking out for you and your interests don't have the same high standards and the corporations...Contributors to the Grocery Manufacturers Association - A leading opponent of GMO labeling11/4/2015 - The Grocery Manufacturers Association is one of the largest organizations representing the food industry. As of 2013, they had over 300 member businesses in food and beverage production as well as biotech and seed companies.
The Grocery Manufacturers Association is one of the leading opponents of...Formaldehyde in GMOs - Another Unlisted Ingredient11/3/2015 - By policy, the FDA considers GMO foods to be substantially equivalent to their non-genetically modified counterparts, and to be generally recognized as safe. GMOs do after all, look very similar to their conventional counterparts and they are grown under somewhat similar conditions. Under FDA guidelines,...Monsanto douchebag Kevin Folta from Univ. of Florida outed as fake podcast alter ego who interviewed himself!10/29/2015 - Have you ever heard of Vern Blazek's Science Power Hour? The chances are good that you haven't, but then you're in the company of about 99.99999 percent of the rest of the planet.
It's really nothing more than just another goofy podcast on the Internet. Over the summer, reports BuzzFeed News, it...Half of European Union now rejects Monsanto imperialism: Consensus leans toward total GMO ban10/27/2015 - The move to ban genetically modified organisms in Europe is gaining ground, with more than half of European Union member nations now having adopted one, and the rest being pressured to follow suit.
As reported by The Guardian, governments in 15 of the European Union's 28 member nations and three...Are you putting Monsanto in your vagina? 85% of tampons and feminine hygiene products contaminated with cancer-causing glyphosate herbicide10/22/2015 - In the late 1970s and early 1980s, over 50 American women were killed by their tampons. Although the FDA and the feminine hygiene industry have gone to tremendous lengths to try to memory hole this true history (and label it just a "rumor"), tampons made from certain non-natural fibers were found to...Scientists develop GMO polio viruses to inject into children as profit-generating cancer treatment10/19/2015 - The latest cancer treatment idea to come out of the biotechnology pipeline isn't safe and effective, all-natural cannabis oil -- no, it's a highly questionable genetically engineered polio virus that scientists from Duke University in North Carolina plan to inject directly into children's brains to...What vaccines and GMOs have in common10/15/2015 - Vaccines and GMOs have more in common than many people realize. Both the biotech and the pharmaceutical industry use the same arguments to get you to accept their products. If you are against GMOs or vaccines, then you must be anti-science!
Nothing could be further from the truth. It is the people...Italy and Austria join growing list of countries banning GMO agriculture10/15/2015 - European nations are leading the world in rejecting genetically modified organisms in food and crops, with two more countries recently joining the list: Italy and Austria.
As reported by Nation of Change, Italian ministries have opted to utilize the newly created European Union rules that permit...GMO Golden Rice may cause birth defects while failing to solve nutrient deficiencies10/13/2015 12:14:36 PM - Scientists in Bangladesh are preparing to begin field trials in November involving the cultivation of the genetically-modified rice variety GR-2 E BRRI Dhan29, known as "Golden Rice," before beginning full-scale production of the crop in that country.
Golden Rice has been touted as the "world's first...Eat here and die: Wyoming considering resolution to officially endorse GMO foods10/7/2015 - For being the least populated state in the U.S., Wyoming sure doesn't seem all that interested in protecting the health and vitality of what few residents it does have. A state legislative committee has proposed a new resolution that would officially endorse genetically modified organisms (GMOs) as...A rational explanation for the mental insanity of Monsanto shills: they lack the nutrition needed for stable mental health10/4/2015 - In trying to reconcile how pro-GMO extremists, some with advanced degrees in science and other related disciplines, are able to justify endorsing imitation food sprayed with deadly chemicals in the name of "sustainability," there's only one logical conclusion: Monsanto apologists aren't getting the...Russian government to outlaw all GMO food products to protect citizens' health10/3/2015 - As the American people are being force-fed GMOs and petitioning their government for honest food labels, other countries around the world are already removing the transgenic ingredients from their food supply. As Americans beg to know what kind of agro-chemicals and GMOs are in their food, the Russian...Meet the sleazy Monsanto operatives pretending to be journalists for Discover, Slate, The Washington Post and the New York Times10/1/2015 - One of the truly fascinating revelations in the recent Freedom of Information Act emails acquired from university professors who whore themselves out to Monsanto is the fact that mainstream media journalists are also Monsanto prostitutes.
These Monsanto operatives pretending to be journalists write...Peanut butter CEO gets 28 years in prison for salmonella cover-up; what about the vaccine cover-up? Or GMO lies?9/22/2015 10:36:49 AM - The now former CEO of Peanut Corp. of America, Stewart Parnell, has been sentenced to 28 years in prison for his involvement in a salmonella outbreak cover-up that ultimately killed nine people and injured several hundred. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, these people ingested...New science paper exposes how corporations censor GMO research they don't like9/21/2015 - Setting the record straight on a controversial toxicity study that links Monsanto's transgenic corn and glyphosate herbicide (Roundup) to liver and kidney toxicity in mice, a new paper published in the journal Environmental Sciences Europe exposes the criminal science cartel that actively censors research...GMO crops totally banned in Russia... powerful nation blocks Monsanto's agricultural imperialism and mass poisoning of the population9/20/2015 - At the same time that Monsanto's corruption is infiltrating every corner of U.S. academia, government regulators and corporate-controlled media, Russia has just announced a total ban on the cultivation of GMO crops.
"A senior Russian government member told reporters the cabinet decided that any food...Germany seeks ban on GMOs to protect its citizens and environment9/18/2015 - There is good news from the anti-GMO battlefront in Europe: Germany has announced that it will seek to ban the import of GM seeds and prohibit the cultivation of GM crops in the European Union's largest economy.
German Agriculture Minister Christian Schmidt has stated that he intends to make use...Rainbow Doritos the latest absurd example of corporate #gaywashing... Frito-Lay trying to feed obese lesbians GMO snack chips laced with MSG and artificial colors9/18/2015 - Corporate #gaywashing is becoming so absurd and insulting to the LGBT community that it deserves serious comment. Frito-Lay has just introduced "Rainbow Doritos" which pander to gays and lesbians, insulting their intelligence by hoping they will blindly eat genetically modified corn chips laced with...No coincidence that exposed Monsanto shill Kevin Folta lies like Hillary Clinton, Bride of Frankenfoods9/17/2015 12:01:53 PM - Embattled Democratic presidential contender Hillary Clinton and disgraced University of Florida plant scientist Prof. Kevin Folta have a great deal in common: they are both very skilled at being dishonest and both are shills for agri- and biotech giant Monsanto.
If Monsanto is King of the Genetically...Monsanto teams up with World Wildlife Fund to convert Amazon into giant GMO plantation9/17/2015 - The World Wildlife Fund (WWF), a charity that began in 1961, is on the verge of destroying everything it stands for. For decades, the charitable organization played an integral role in conserving important regions while working on behalf of animal welfare around the world. In the new millennia, however,...Rand Paul begins shilling for Monsanto9/16/2015 - In a strange twist, Rand Paul has recently allied with Monsanto and has joined the ranks of academic shill Kevin Folta after coming out against GMO labeling, stating that the labeling requirements would push up the price of food for consumers  particularly poor ones.
To make matters worse,...The Atlantic exposed for colluding with Monsanto-funded scientists after failing to retract fraudulent story defaming Food Babe9/16/2015 - An unflattering media storm continues to engulf University of Florida professor Kevin Folta after he was exposed for colluding with the biotech industry, namely Monsanto, despite his repeated denials of any financial ties to the GM seed conglomerate.
The revelations, blown open by The New York Times...Rare film clip shows George H. W. Bush plotting with Monsanto to use US government to spread GMO imperialism9/15/2015 - Supporters of genetically modified or engineered foods want you to believe that the concept is no big deal and that humans have been cross-breeding and "modifying" food for centuries.
In reality, however, GMO seeds and foods created in a lab are far different than the traditional hybrid crop. In...Big Food corporations, Wall Street buying up natural brands to silence support for GMO labeling9/14/2015 11:51:07 AM - One of the fastest growing natural juice brands in the country is adding Coca-Cola and Goldman Sachs to its lineup of stakeholders. The Suja juice company, a California startup that has seen massive growth over the past several years, currently offers cold-pressed, unpasteurized, non-GMO and certified...Monsanto wants to use Hawaiian students' photos in ads after denying their right to regulate GMOs and poisons in their environment9/14/2015 - Agribusiness giant Monsanto is pushing to use the photos of students attending an elementary school in Hawaii but critics say the effort appears aimed at propagandizing the increased use of the company's pesticides.
As reported by Hawaii News Now, there is now a plaque at the entrance to the office...USDA sued for violating FOIA, denying Americans the right to know the harmful effects of GMOs9/13/2015 - A food activist organization has filed suit against the U.S. Department of Agriculture, alleging that one of its agencies is in violation of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) provisions after failing to provide requested documents.
The Center for Food Safety, in its suit against the USDA's Animal...Check out these natural ancient grain alternatives to processed wheat9/12/2015 3:37:16 PM - For centuries, humans consumed ancient, naturally occurring grains, but eventually these were replaced with mass-produced wheat. Now, however, ancient grains are gaining in popularity once more as a healthier alternative to processed, GMO grain.
As reported by Newsmax Health, whole grains have benefits...Shady libertarian front group run by industry shill is now Monsanto's attack dog with hit piece on Chipotle9/11/2015 10:36:51 AM - A new propaganda blitz leveled against Chipotle's fast-casual restaurant chain claims that anyone who frequents the GMO-free healthy food store will actually pack on the pounds over the course of a year.
As reported by the New York Post, the aggressive campaign warns patrons that they'll end up like...Kellogg's Kashi cereal found to be full of GMOs and cancer-causing glyphosate9/11/2015 - Suffering a massive market blow after its parent company was exposed for funding efforts to block compulsory labeling of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), the Kashi brand of breakfast cereal is back for round two. GMO Free USA has published the official results of new independent laboratory tests,...University of Hawaii faculty call out corrupt, Monsanto-funded college for persecuting professor who supports GMO labeling9/11/2015 - A professor at the University of Hawaii's (UH) College of Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources, Hector Valenzuela, has been repeatedly stripped of his rights to freely express his opinion against GMOs and his support of GMO labeling. He's been the recipient of unprofessional emails from other faculty...GMO shill Kevin Folta throws pathetic Twitter tantrum after being exposed as a Monsanto whore9/10/2015 - Despite being outed as an unethical lying "academic," University of Florida Professor Kevin Folta isn't backing down, instead posting a barrage of illogical tweets in a cringe worthy episode of attacks and apparent self-defense.
Though Folta previously denied ties to the rich and powerful agricultural...Kellogg's cereals found to be contaminated with Monsanto's cancer-causing glyphosate9/10/2015 - If you think Kellogg's Kashi GoLean cereals are healthy, you might want to think again.
A recent finding has shed light on the fact that glyphosate, the main ingredient in Monsanto's RoundUp, along with its metabolite AMPA (aminomethylphosphonic acid), exist in the cereal.
It's no secret that...Chipotle sees meteoric rise in revenue and stocks after banning GMOs from menu; McDonald's dies as Americans reject junk food9/10/2015 - Ever since Chipotle announced that they were removing genetically modified organisms from their menu, they have exploded onto the scene as an honest and wholesome brand, leaving junk food peddlers like McDonald's in their dust.
Chipotle is experiencing impressive growth as their shares reach all-time...Scientists GONE WILD: Discredited Monsanto shill Kevin Folta unleashes twitter aneurism, accuses Health Ranger of 'violence' and Food Babe of 'terrorism'9/10/2015 - There's nothing quite as much fun to watch as a discredited Monsanto puppet self-destructing across social media. After being exposed as an academic whore who lied about receiving money from Monsanto, Univ. of Florida scientist Kevin Folta has now gone "full retard" and unleashed a bizarre series of...Monsanto has a long history of bullying, deceiving and exploiting farmers and governments9/9/2015 2:52:16 PM - As news swirls around the internet that Agri-giants like Monsanto pay academics and scientists to be shills for their companies, it is worth recalling that these same firms also engage in other reprehensible and unethical types of corporate behavior.
In 2012, The New American reported that the latest...Academic Hall of Shame: 'Monsanto Mafia' scientists named, exposed for pushing GMO agenda in exchange for grants, favors and gifts9/9/2015 - The list of "Monsanto Mafia" scientists just keeps getting larger. Day by day, we're coming to learn that Monsanto has infiltrated dozens of universities across America, offering bribes (grants, gifts, donations, etc.) in exchange for the "intellectual protection" services of university scientists who...GMO activist group exposes Big Biotech's academic prostitution ring involving so-called 'scientists' who take money to say anything9/9/2015 - In recent years, sales of Monsanto's genetically modified seeds have steadily risen, but executives at the St. Louis-based bio- and agri-giant were becoming increasingly concerned about attacks on the safety claims of their GMO products.
As such, the world's largest seed company and its partners...Academic GMO shills exposed: Once-secret emails reveal gross collusion with Monsanto, academic fraud at the highest levels inside U.S. universities9/8/2015 6:10:03 PM - U.S. Right to Know (USRTK), a non-profit organization dedicated to exposing the fraud and corruption surrounding the food industry, launched an investigation into the intimate and unethical relationship between the biotech industry and university faculty and staff, which is used to manipulate public...Biotech industry emails reveal academic GMO prostitutes acknowledging their roles as paid shills while lying to the public9/8/2015 5:51:38 PM - One of the arguments supporters of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs) often give in defense of the controversial technology is that the scientific community has supposedly come to a consensus that biotechnology is a safe and effective way to produce food. What they're not telling you is that many...Biotech industry hired evil PR firm that uses criminal tactics, NSA and government thugs to destroy opponents9/8/2015 4:02:43 PM - In recent days, several mainstream and alternative news outlets such as The New York Times, GMO.news, and U.S. Right To Know (USRTK) have published stories revealing the incestuous and profitable relationship between Big BioAg and scientists, the latter of whom sell their souls and credibility to companies...BOMBSHELL: New York Times exposes academic scientists prostituting themselves out to Monsanto and the biotech industry9/8/2015 - File this under the category of "journalism we never thought we'd see." In a New York Times article published over the weekend, writer Eric Lipton covers the outrageous academic fraud taking place across America as university "scientists" prostitute themselves out to the biotech industry.
It's important...Academia's biotech prostitutes exposed: GMO.news posts full texts of once-secret emails between Monsanto and Dr. Kevin Folta of the University of Florida9/8/2015 - The US Right to Know organization has just gone public with a collection of emails showing the incredible corruption of academic "scientists" by Monsanto and the biotech industry.
GMO.news has now released the full document dumps in both PDF and TXT format, unveiling a fascinating world of corporate...'Independent' GMO expert busted for receiving $25,000 from Monsanto9/8/2015 - Huge corporations like Monsanto that have suspect agendas - such as selling poisons worldwide and screwing with the very fabric of Nature - have learned long ago how to implement a number of dirty tricks designed to fool authorities and the public into believing that their methods and products are safe.
One...How GMO junk food industry is trying to trick pro-labeling Americans into supporting DARK Act9/8/2015 - Much of what's driving support for the so-called "Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015," which you might better recognize under the more aptly-titled moniker of the DARK (Deny Americans the Right to Know) Act, is coming as a result of blatant industry deception, not grassroots enthusiasm.
A...Scotland and Germany use "opt-out" clause to ban GMO agriculture9/6/2015 - Operating under a recently passed law by the European Union that allows individual member countries to "opt out" of GMO cultivation, Scotland and Germany announced their decision to forbid the planting of Monsanto's GM corn, also known as MON810. (Republished from GMO.news.)
Germany's Agriculture...NEW independent website keeps track of breaking news on GMOs, Monsanto, glyphosate and more9/4/2015 3:03:33 PM - For all the latest biotechnology news, Natural News is proud to unveil the all-new GMO.news web resource, which offers readers all the top breaking articles and reports on genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), chemical pesticides such as Roundup (glyphosate), industry corruption, agriculture policy,...Group calls for transparency overhaul in scientific research to combat corporate fraud in GMO, vaccine and pharmaceutical studies9/1/2015 - Recognizing that scientific fraud has spiraled completely out of control, a group of academic leaders is taking a stand to bolster transparency and improve the level of integrity in fields of research relating to biotechnology, genetically-modified organisms (GMOs), pharmaceuticals, and vaccines.
Rick...Should GMO companies be held liable when your gut starts producing pesticides?8/30/2015 - On Monsanto's website, this multinational seed conglomerate makes the claim that Bt toxin engineered into its genetically-modified (GM) corn and cotton crops is "naturally occurring" and poses no threat to "humans, other mammals, birds, fish or beneficial insects." But a closer look at the science reveals...Scotland to ban GMOs to protect citizens' health; US government refuses to label GMOs despite support from 93% of citizens8/30/2015 - Founded as a representative republican democracy, America became the first country in the modern world to be ruled by the principle of the consent of the governed. Today, some 240 years after the beginning of our War of Independence, that notion seems like little more than a quaint anachronism.
Polls...Monsanto's GMO seed patents begin to expire8/27/2015 - Once upon a time, people who planted seeds and worked with the land answered only to the laws of nature. Farmers were free. They kept the seeds from each harvest so they could plant them again the next season. No permission was required to plant each year. Chemical herbicides were not needed to grow...NYT calls out Coca-Cola's harmful junk food science while ignoring Monsanto's fraudulent GMO science8/26/2015 - The New York Times recently published an in-depth article on one of its blogs exposing the Coca-Cola Company's efforts to promote flawed science downplaying the importance of cutting calories -- particularly empty calories -- in order to lose weight. The company has been enlisting scientists to push...Kellogg's Corn Flakes were invented to stop sexual behavior; thanks to GMOs, they're now doing just that!8/26/2015 - Did you know that Kellogg's Corn Flakes were originally meant to suppress sexual desire in people who ate them? That was the intention of corn flakes inventor John Harvey Kellogg, who believed that sex was unhealthy for the body as well as the soul. In order to spread his libido-suppressing invention...How Monsanto gave rise to the dark era of agricultural fascism8/25/2015 2:17:37 PM - Germany is prepared to follow Scotland's lead in seeking to ban the cultivation of genetically modified crops in Europe's largest economy in what appears to be more rejection of top-down, Nazi-like authoritarianism over the country's food supply.
As reported by Bloomberg Business, the German Agriculture...They'll never label GMO in America, so buy organic from now on, because the rest is just toxic food that feeds disease and disorder8/22/2015 - Face it, besides small farmers with integrity, there is no "gray area" anymore between organic and GMO. The corporate powers "that be" have run the conventional market of food and beverages straight into the ground, depleting all nutrients, one way or another, and then adding in toxins. From pasteurizing...GMO industry set to flood U.S. food supply with endless torrent of toxic chemicals8/18/2015 - The U.S. Department of Agriculture's recent approval of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) resistant to new herbicides will soon unleash a flood of new toxic chemicals across the nation's agricultural heartland, observers have warned.
Previously, nearly all GMO crops approved for planting were...Nearly 70% of physicians say GMO foods should be labeled8/17/2015 - One thing is clear regarding the GMO labeling issue. The vast majority of Americans -- more than 90 percent -- are in favor of mandatory labeling laws. A recent poll by a physician's association revealed that more than two-thirds (68 percent) of doctors are also in favor of mandatory GMO food labeling.
The...Why is Russia so much smarter than the U.S. when it comes to GMOs?8/15/2015 - He may have a reputation internationally as a tough guy, but when it comes to the health of his people, Russian President Vladimir Putin is a softie.
But, as countless, shirtless photos of Russia's leader doing a variety of manly things have also proven, Putin is also into his health, which could...Washington state initiative I-735 seeks signatures to stop corporations from GMO bullying through anti-personhood movement8/13/2015 - After the disappointment of failing to get GMO labeling passed in Washington in 2013 (I-522), the citizens of Washington have banded together to pass an even more powerful initiative that would claw back the rights of the people from the clutches of billionaire multinational agrochemical corporations....Biotech violence against humanity: GMO industry kills and maims innocent people for profit8/13/2015 - At least eight people were injured and one killed during a recent scuffle in Brazil over the use of agricultural land for genetically-modified organisms (GMOs). A peasant movement known as "Via Campesina" had been protesting a 304-acre farm owned by biotechnology giant Syngenta Ag when a small bus filled...Flashback: Syngenta's armed gunmen opened fire on crowd of peasant farmers protesting at illegal GMO facility8/12/2015 - An incident that occurred several years ago is worthy of a revisit, especially as the debate over genetically modified organisms heats up and the mainstream "scientific community" has become much more militant and demanding that everyone be compliant and obedient and never challenge conventional wisdom...US Senate to vote on bill to label GMO salmon8/12/2015 - A rider attached to a federal funding bill for the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) would make it mandatory for sellers of genetically-modified (GMO) salmon to label the product as such in the interest of transparency and consumer confidence.
With overwhelming...Gwyneth Paltrow campaigns for GMO labeling at U.S. capitol8/11/2015 - Taking a much-needed stance against the horrors of GMO chemical violence, actress Gwyneth Paltrow -- long known for her attention to healthy eating -- recently headed to the U.S. capitol to express her concerns. Speaking to politicians about what's on many Americans' minds, she voiced the ludicrous...Rep. Pompeo lies to American citizens while passing bill that bans GMO labeling8/11/2015 - Big Biotech seems to have found a political front man in Kansas Republican Representative Mike Pompeo, whose relentless efforts to kill the GMO labeling movement are being driven by his many industry sponsors, including the anti-labeling group Koch Industries.
The "Safe and Accurate Food Labeling...Texas GMO labeling bill now in Public Health Committee8/11/2015 - A measure introduced in the Texas legislature to require labeling for all foods containing genetically modified organisms (GMOs) remains in the Committee on Public Health and has not been disposed of, meaning the bill still has a chance of surviving so it can be voted on by the full House and Senate.
The...DARK Act would cause America's crop fields to be saturated with cancer-causing glyphosate8/7/2015 - A bill pending before the U.S. Senate would not just deny consumers the right to know whether their food contains genetically modified organisms (GMOs), it could also strip states of their right to limit or regulate the use of dangerous herbicide chemicals widely sprayed over fields of GMO crops.
The...Big Food companies spend billions of dollars annually on marketing; why can't they afford to label GMOs?8/5/2015 - One of the most common excuses major food corporations offer when pressed on the issue of why they refuse to support mandatory labeling of genetically-modified organisms (GMOs) is that doing so would be too expensive, raising food costs for consumers.
But an investigation into this claim reveals...Texas introduces bill to mandate GMO labeling8/4/2015 - Despite a major setback last month when the U.S. House of Representatives voted 275-150 to pass legislation that would prohibit states from enacting the labeling of genetically modified organisms (GMOs), the Right to Know movement continues to gain traction as it lays its eyes upon the Lone Star State.
(If...Doctors Against GMOs - Hear from those who are speaking out against biotech8/4/2015 - The evidence is mounting  GMOs are a danger to health. Long-term studies have revealed organ damage, cancer, and reproductive damage in second and third generation animal studies. There are doctors who are willing to publicly take a stand against genetic engineering. Here are a few of them.
Dr....House members who voted in favor of DARK Act to block GMO labeling received windfall payouts from Big Food7/30/2015 12:48:34 PM - Everyone knows that money talks in D.C. But most people probably aren't aware of just how loudly it speaks, greatly influencing policy decisions like the recent passage of the Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015, known as the "DARK" Act by its critics. This nefarious bill aims to bar states...Neil Young donates $100,000 to defend Vermont's GMO labeling law7/30/2015 - Legendary musician Neil Young has joined the state of Vermont to fight big food corporations like Monsanto in one of the most important battles for honest food labeling in the United States. In May 2014, Vermont Governor Peter Shumlin made history by signing the first law in the United States that would...Death of American democracy: Federal judge tells Hawaiians they have no right to ban GMOs7/26/2015 - A federal judge has blocked a local Hawaiian ordinance banning the cultivation of genetically modified organisms, making the law essentially unenforceable, at least for the time being.
Chief U.S. District Judge Susan Oki Mollway, who was appointed to the federal bench by President Bill Clinton in...DARK Act now being debated in the House: would block GMO labeling laws nationwide, leaving consumers in the dark7/24/2015 - Although there has been very little media coverage regarding it, a bill being debated in the House this week has enormous negative implications that will potentially affect the health of every single American citizen.
The Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015 is a bill which, if signed into...See all 1261 GMO feature articles.Concept-related articles:Technology:The Top Ten Technologies: #8 Computer / Human Interface SystemsEmerging technology is not the answer to the world's social and economic problemsBreakthrough Food Technology Process Protects Foods With Thin Film Made From Natural Ingredients; Replaces Plastic WrapMonsanto: The world's poster child for corporate manipulation and deceitWhen technology becomes religion and science becomes GodFarmers:Monsanto: The world's poster child for corporate manipulation and deceitWHO:Whole Foods caught in GMO marketing deception, false advertising - here's the proofFuel:Top Superfood Formulator Living Fuel Earns NaturalNews Recommendation for "Living Fuel Rx" Product LineOil:Cod Liver Oil: The Number One SuperfoodOils:Raise Your Immunity Frequency With Essential Oils to Beat the Common ColdVegetable:New "Juice Feasting" Emerging as Phytonutrient-Rich Disease-Fighting Nutritional SystemGrassroots:Warning to activists: Grassroots movements being systematically infiltrated by big industry operativesGrowing:Research adds weight to growing pains in children (press release)Snacks:Consume healthy snacks for weight lossConsumers:Safeguard Organic Standards: 10 Reasons Consumers Buy OrganicVegan:Top seven vegan sources of proteinFood:The Honest Food Guide empowers consumers with independent information about foods and healthFoods:Whole Foods caught in GMO marketing deception, false advertising - here's the proofMeat:Processed Meat Unsafe For Human Consumption; Cancer Experts Warn of Dietary DangersResearch:Human medical experimentation in the United States: The shocking true history of modern medicine and psychiatry (1965-2005)
Subscribe to the Health Ranger's
FREE email newsletter
Follow @HealthRanger
Concepts related to GMOtechnology  environmentalists  biodiesel  farmers  WHO  fuel  oil  oils  vegetable  grassroots  growing  snacks  consumers  vegan  food  foods  meat  research  natural  products  store  spice  stores  green  people  alternative  snack  sales  popularity  free  category  hemp  pesticides  Canada  herbicides  GLA  hemp products  diet  cannabis  Ensure  omega-3 View GMO on NaturalPedia
Today's Top Stories on NaturalNews
Today | Week | Month | Year
Plantain, a common driveway weed, is one of nature's most powerful medicines
Government advises airlines to spray pesticides on passengers
The best argument yet for concealed carry: Milwaukee Black Lives Matter rioters target white people for extreme violence... the police can no longer protect you in America's race war
Lead HPV vaccine developer admits Gardasil, Cervarix are unscientific scams with deadly consequences for children
The mysterious death of famed herbalist Dr. Sebi while in police custody sparks rumors the naturalist may have been murdered
California about to pass the 'Medical Pedophiles Protection Act' to criminalize journalists for posting videos that document medical abuse of children, seniors and surgical patients
Why flu shots are the greatest medical fraud in history
Loads of expensive cherries left to rot as USDA forces farmer to dump crop on the ground to make room for overseas imports
CBD chaos: DEA's refusal to reschedule marijuana molecules just the latest protectionist racket from the criminal corporate cartels running the corrupt U.S. government
Zika insecticide being sprayed in Miami causes paralysis, cancer and death
How Big Pharma gets away with selling crystal meth to children: By renaming it 'Adderall'
After 7-hour medical board exam about prescription drugs, holistic Doctor decides to skip board certification
Why vaccines, pesticides and chemtrails are the top three weapons of mass destruction
Turmeric spices found heavily contaminated with toxic LEAD... FDA forces nationwide recalls for multiple brands (see list here)
Facebook censors photo of ovarian cancer patient because the truth exposes the criminal drug industry
Commercial almond milk exposed as fake beverage thickened with carrageenan instead of almonds
Five amazing health benefits of cilantro
The herbal remedy EVERYONE should know about: Turmeric golden honey can fight weight gain, relieve pain and combat inflammation
Turmeric spices found heavily contaminated with toxic LEAD... FDA forces nationwide recalls for multiple brands (see list here)
The mysterious death of famed herbalist Dr. Sebi while in police custody sparks rumors the naturalist may have been murdered
Hillary Clinton's health in rapid collapse... voters in shock after photos show her unable to walk up small flight of stairs
Why flu shots are the greatest medical fraud in history
Mainstream media hates holistic health so much that it's now attacking America's most decorated Olympian Michael Phelps for cupping
Government advises airlines to spray pesticides on passengers
The best argument yet for concealed carry: Milwaukee Black Lives Matter rioters target white people for extreme violence... the police can no longer protect you in America's race war
Lead HPV vaccine developer admits Gardasil, Cervarix are unscientific scams with deadly consequences for children
Top 7 condiments that destroy health faster than you'd ever think
Plantain, a common driveway weed, is one of nature's most powerful medicines
Is the United States using HAARP to devastate food supplies and cause mass starvation in other countries?
A powerful remedy to dissolve kidney stones
CDC admits most people self-immunize against Zika virus; no vaccine required
Millions of Americans exposed to deadly, toxic chemicals in public water supplies... massive scientific investigation backs up Health Ranger findings
How Big Pharma gets away with selling crystal meth to children: By renaming it 'Adderall'
Baby formula is loaded with GMOs - Avoid these brands
New Health Ranger video shatters Whole Foods illusion; chain caught selling overpriced products containing heavy metals, pesticides
Popular talk show host claims homeless people are being murdered for their organs
Hillary Clinton's health in rapid collapse... voters in shock after photos show her unable to walk up small flight of stairs
EVERYTHING IS RIGGED: Medicine, science, elections, the media, money, education, search engines, social media... you are living in a fabricated fairy tale
Staged Zika pandemic was engineered by globalist governments to justify the aerial bombardment of awakening populations with toxic chemicals
The Pokemon Pied Piper zombie apocalypse has begun: Hoards of mindless, obedient sheeple now stampede anywhere the puppet masters plant fictitious monsters
Harvard Medical School scientists need a female volunteer willing to give birth to a genetically modified Neanderthal
Turmeric spices found heavily contaminated with toxic LEAD... FDA forces nationwide recalls for multiple brands (see list here)
40 shockingly simple skills that today's Millennials have no idea how to do
The WHOLE TRUTH about Whole Foods: Shocking new mini-documentary excoriates this deceptive, fraudulent corporation for becoming the Monsanto of food retailing
The mysterious death of famed herbalist Dr. Sebi while in police custody sparks rumors the naturalist may have been murdered
ZIKA DOOMSDAY HOAX UNRAVELS: Predicted 'explosion' of brain defects didn't happen... entire scare campaign was manufactured
President Obama signs bill that forever exempts Big Food from placing GMO labels on food packages
Top 10 inexpensive food items that can PREVENT nearly every disease and disorder known to mankind
DIRTY DEEDS: Leaked emails reveal how Clinton conspired with DNC to destroy Bernie Sanders, the only anti-Monsanto candidate
The best and worst forms of magnesium to take as a supplement
Women with larger behinds are healthier and more intelligent, study finds
National Guard, DEA & state police just raided an 81-year-old cancer patient's organic garden to 'protect' you
Why flu shots are the greatest medical fraud in history
Frankincense oil kills cancer cells while boosting the immune system, studies show
ANALYSIS: Chipotle is a victim of corporate sabotage... biotech industry food terrorists are planting e.coli in retaliation for restaurant's anti-GMO menu
BOMBSHELL: China and America already at war: Tianjin explosion carried out by Pentagon space weapon in retaliation for Yuan currency devaluation... Military helicopters now patrolling Beijing
Canadian government orders residents to get rid of their old wood-burning stoves or pay thousands of dollars in fines
Thermonuclear missile launch near Los Angeles is final sign of World War III on the precipice... US, China and Russia all escalating covert attacks in run up to global war
Women with larger behinds are healthier and more intelligent, study finds
Salmon caught near Seattle proven to be inundated with antidepressants, cocaine and more
The best and worst forms of magnesium to take as a supplement
What you are not being told about the Zika virus
Does green tea have caffeine?
Seven things you need to know
San Bernardino shooting has all the signs of a staged government operation or ISIS terror attack (from what we know so far)
Smokers or past smokers: Six ways to cleanse and revitalize your lungs
10 health benefits of cucumbers
Top six alkaline foods to eat every day for vibrant health
INVESTIGATION: Three days before Dr. Bradstreet was found dead in a river, U.S. govt. agents raided his research facility to seize a breakthrough cancer treatment called GcMAF
The lemon detox diet - a recipe that really works
Statin scam exposed: Cholesterol drugs cause rapid aging, brain damage and diabetes
Zika HOAX exposed by South American doctors: Brain deformations caused by larvicide chemical linked to Monsanto; GM mosquitoes a 'total failure'
The health benefits of blackstrap molasses
See All Top Headlines...
Most Popular Stories
TED aligns with Monsanto, halting any talks about GMOs, 'food as medicine' or natural healing
10 other companies that use the same Subway yoga mat chemical in their buns
Warning: Enrolling in Obamacare allows government to link your IP address with your name, social security number, bank accounts and web surfing habits
High-dose vitamin C injections shown to annihilate cancer
USDA to allow U.S. to be overrun with contaminated chicken from China
Vaccine fraud exposed: Measles and mumps making a huge comeback because vaccines are designed to fail, say Merck virologists
New USDA rule allows hidden feces, pus, bacteria and bleach in conventional poultry
Battle for humanity nearly lost: global food supply deliberately engineered to end life, not nourish it
Harvard research links fluoridated water to ADHD, mental disorders
10 outrageous (but true) facts about vaccines the CDC and the vaccine industry don't want you to know
EBT card food stamp recipients ransack Wal-Mart stores, stealing carts full of food during federal computer glitch
Cannabis kicks Lyme disease to the curb
Recommended Resources
TV.NaturalNews.com is
a free video website featuring thousands of videos on holistic health, nutrition,
fitness, recipes, natural remedies and much more.
CounterThink Cartoons are
free to view and download. They cover topics like health, environment and freedom.
The Consumer Wellness Center is
a non-profit organization offering nutrition education grants to programs that
help children and expectant mothers around the world.
Food Investigations is
a series of mini-documentaries exposing the truth about dangerous ingredients
in the food supply.
Webseed.com offers
alternative health programs, documentaries and more.
The Honest Food Guide is
a free, downloadable public health and nutrition chart that dares to tell the
truth about what foods we should really be eating.
HealingFoodReference.com offers
a free online reference database of healing foods, phytonutrients and plant-based
medicines that prevent or treat diseases and health conditions.
HerbReference.com is
a free, online reference library that lists medicinal herbs and their health
benefits.
NutrientReference.com is
a free online reference database of phytonutrients (natural medicines found in
foods) and their health benefits. Lists diseases, foods, herbs and more.
This
site is part of the Natural News Network  2014 All Rights
Reserved. Privacy | Terms All
content posted on this site is commentary or opinion and is protected under Free
Speech. Truth Publishing International, LTD. is not responsible for content written
by contributing authors. The information on this site is provided for educational
and entertainment purposes only. It is not intended as a substitute for professional
advice of any kind. Truth Publishing assumes no responsibility for the use or
misuse of this material. Your use of this website indicates your agreement to
these terms and those published here. All trademarks,
registered trademarks and servicemarks mentioned on this site are the property
of their respective owners.