What is GMO? | GMO Answers
Jump to navigation
[ login ]
U.S.A. (English)
Spanish EN | ES
Chinese EN | 
Portuguese EN | PT
Vietnamese EN | VI
Subscribe
Pinterest
Google+
Facebook
Tweet
Search form
Ask Your Questions
Explore the BasicsGMO Basics
Todays GMO Crops
GMOs and Your Health
The History of Crop Modification
The Future of Agriculture
Studies and ArticlesGMO Answers on Forbes
Dig DeeperMap - Global Approvals of GMO Crops
The Most Common GMO Myths
Frequently Cited GMO Studies
Educational Materials & Downloads
Glossary
About GMO ANSWERSAbout GMO Answers
Contributing Experts
Events & Appearances
Ask Us Anything About GMOs!
How is your question answered?
Q:
What is GMO?
Question Submitted By: Isabella2002 from Newtown, Connecticut ** Questions submitted to GMO Answers appear as written at the time of submission.
Questions are reviewed to ensure they conform with our house rules, but are never edited or altered by GMO Answers.
Notification Preferences
A:Expert Answer
By:
Community Manager, Moderator for GMOAnswers.com on Wednesday, 10/01/2014 12:45 pm
What is a GMO?A GMO isaplantdeveloped through a process in which a copy of a desired gene or section of genetic material from one plant or organism is placed in another plant. The only GMOscommerciallyavailable in the U.S. are the following nine crops: soybeans, corn (field and sweet), papaya, potato, canola, cotton, alfalfa, sugar beets and summer squash.
What a GMO isn't:
A GMO is not an ingredient. Ingredients in the foods you eat may be made using one or more of the eight GM crops.
GMOs do not equal processed food. Processed foods may contain one or more of the eight GM crops, or they can be made with organic or other non-GM ingredients.
Why GMO?GMOs are created to achieve a desired trait, such as resistance to an insect or improvement to the ripening process, in order to better meet a customers market need. The eight commercially GM crops were created for:
Insect resistance.This trait provides farmers with season-long protection against target pests, reduces pesticide use and lowers input costs.
Drought resistance. GM crops that express drought resistance can grow in much drier areas, conserving water and other environmental resources.
Herbicide tolerance. Crops that can tolerate broad-spectrum herbicides, like the agrochemical glyphosate, allow farmers to fight weeds by applying herbicides only when needed and participate in no-till methods that preserve topsoil and prevent erosion.
Disease resistance. Through genetic modification, the Hawaiian papaya industry was able to overcome the papaya ringspot virus, which had the potential to devastate that industry.
Increased/enhanced nutritional content. Genetically modified soybeans with a healthier oil profile are used in anew, heart-healthy soybean oil.
Future GMO crops have the potential to help:
Reduce food waste. A new GMapple that doesnt turn brownwhen sliced could help reduce food waste.
Provide essential vitamins.Golden Rice, GM rice that contains beta-carotene, could help fight vitamin A deficiency, especially in children and pregnant women.
Reduce food allergies. GM peanuts modified for allergens could reduce the risk of peanut-allergy reactions.
Note: Farmers do not use genetic modification to increase crop size, create seedless varieties, etc. These crop traits are created through good farming practices, cross-breeding or hybridization. Learn more about the different methods of crop breedinghere.
Common misconceptions about GMOs:You may have heard that GMOs are untested and unregulated. This couldn't be further from the truth. GMOs are the most regulated and tested product in agricultural history.Click hereto find hundreds of studies on the safety of GMOs.Click hereto find thousands of independent studies. GMOs take years and millions of dollars to come to market.Click hereto find out how much time, money and research goes into every GMO you eat before you ever see it.
You've probably heard that GMOs cause cancer, autism, gluten issues or other illness in animals or humans.While this makes for good news, it isblatantlyfalse. In 20-plus years on the market, GMOs have not caused or contributed to a single illness or death. This is not industry hype; it is common and accepted fact.Every leading healthorganizationin the world stands behindthesafety of GMOs. Extensive andcontinuousstudies on GMOs are being conducted to ensure their ongoing safety for consumption.
Your questions about GMOs:Consumers have many questions about GMOs. We identified the top 10 such questions and are answering themhere. If you have questions that aren't included in those 10, we encourage you toask them here.
Topic: Other 1 Comment | Add Comment Log in or register to post comments
To post a comment, please login.
Other Questions in this Category
Q:
history of genetic modified salmon
Q:
How many ways of GMO is there?
Q:
what is the genetically engineered ingredient in bananas
Q:
i am doing a speech on gmos is there any thing that mite help me understand more about it
Q:
Hi, I am working on a school research project about genetic technologies, including GMOs. What purposes are crops most commonly genetically modified for?
See All Questions
Moderator Updates
Your question may not immediately appear on the site. Questions go through a spam filter and Community Manager review before appearing on the site.
Click here to learn more about the independent & company experts answering your questions.
Welcome to the GMO Answers community! Please remember to vote on the questions you'd like to see answered first.
Community Manager
Moderator for GMOAnswers.com
The GMO Answers Community Manager is the website moderator who helps answer your questions by linking to resources on GMO Answers and other online content which addresses GMOs and biotechnology. The Community Manager also ensures the dialogue among the community members remains constructive and respective of all viewpoints. If you have questions about how the community is managed, please visit our house rules, http://gmoanswers.com/house-rules.
Ask
Explore
Studies & Articles
Dig Deeper
About
Contact
GMO Answers on Forbes
GMO Answers - Japan
Educational Resources
GMO Answers Widget
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
 2013-2016 Council for Biotechnology Information
Follow Us
Like Us
+1 Us
The responses on all GMOAnswers.com websites do not necessarily reflect the views of all Council for Biotechnology Information member companies.
U.S.A. (English)
Spanish EN | ES
Chinese EN | 
Portuguese EN | PT
Vietnamese EN | VI