GMO LLC - About GMO
North America
Boston | San Francisco
Login
|
FAQ|
Ask GMO|
Search
HomeAbout GMO
Select a Region
North America
Europe
Asia-Pacific
Mission Statement
Firm History
GMO In The News
Investor Information
People
Contact Us
Employment Opportunities
Legal & Compliance
About GMO
Founded in 1977, GMO is a private partnership whose sole business is investment management.
GMO proudly serves some of the most prestigious and sophisticated investors globally, focused on providing them with great investment results. We also work hard to partner with our clients by listening to them, answering their questions objectively, offering our insights proactively, finding ways in which we can add value for them, and following through on our commitments.
Our client base is comprised primarily of institutions, including corporate and public defined benefit and defined contribution retirement plans, endowments, foundations, and financial intermediaries.
GMO is a global investment leader with expertise in managing multi-asset class strategies as well as focused strategies in a number of specific asset classes. Our approach seeks to identify asset classes and securities for which we believe we can get paid to take risk and utilizes a long-term investment horizon, a belief in the power of mean reversion, discipline, conviction, and a commitment to research. We are willing to take bold, differentiated positions when opportunities warrant and have the patience and fortitude to invest with a long-term perspective.
We have managed portfolios through multiple market cycles and we constantly re-examine market opportunities across asset classes, testing our assumptions and embracing changing market dynamics. We utilize this deep experience to construct portfolios that we believe will offer our clients superior investment results. We also leverage our proven expertise to develop unique, insightful market research and commentary for our clients. We succeed when our clients succeed.
As of June 30, 2016
Copyright  2016 by GMO LLC. All rights reserved.
Content may not be reproduced, distributed or transmitted, in whole or in portion, by any means, without written permission from GMO LLC.
Privacy Policy|
Terms And Conditions|
Benchmark Disclaimers