5 Fascinating Examples Of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) - Insider Monkey
Toggle navigation
Markets
News Tech Market Movers Futures Forex Macroeconomic Predictions Options
Insider Trading
Main Education Center Stock Screener Insider Purchases Insider Sales Browse Companies Latest 13D & 13G Filings
Hedge Funds
Main Education Center Browse Hedge Funds Best Performing Worst Performing Other Institutional Investors
Retirement
ETF Trading Commodities Gold Dividend Stocks
Opinion
Main Hedge Fund Analysis Stock Analysis We Disagree Lists Authors
Premium
Newsletters My Subscriptions
Log In Sign Up
Companies 0 See All
Hedge Funds 0 See All
Insiders 0 See All
Institutional Investors 0 See All
Click here to see all
results for
Sorry, no results has been found matching your query.
Adblocker Detected
Dear Valued Visitor, We have noticed that you are using an ad blocker software.
Although advertisements on the web pages may degrade your experience, our business certainly depends on them and we can only keep providing you high-quality research based articles as long as we can display ads on our pages. To view this article, you can disable your ad blocker and refresh this page or simply login. We only allow registered users to use ad blockers. You can sign up for free by clicking here or you can login if you are already a member.
Lists
5 Fascinating Examples Of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)
Published on June 18, 2013 at 11:19 am by
David Nixon
in Lists
Page 1 of 5Next >>
Ever wondered what a genetically modified organism (GMO) is? The world of experimental science is in continuous evolution and one of its milestones is represented by the appearance of such genetically modified organisms. Although you have probably already heard this term before, we assure you that there are tons of things that you still not know about, things which will surprise and shock you at the same time. Below we have compiled a list of the most fascinating details relating to genetically modified organisms. No. 5: The Umbuku Lizard Photo Credit: Jim Bahn Unlike the other genetically modified organisms in our countdown, the fabrication of this little lizard has no practical and scientific reason behind it. It was done simply to prove that it can be done. Scientists managed to find a gene in the DNA of the Umbuku, a rare species of lizards living in Africa, which once altered gave them the ability to fly. Currently, there are six flying Umbuku reported to have been created. See the rest of the examples of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) on the following pages:
Page 1 of 5Next >>
5 Fascinating Details About Genetically Modified Organisms Fern Spider Genetically Modified Organisms GMO Headline Lemur Cat List XFinance Monsanto Drama Paper Tree Prolos Fira Slideshow Umbuku Lizard
Loading Comments...
View Comments
Hedge Fund Resource Center
How to Beat the Market by 20 Percentage Points Why Track Hedge Funds? Download a Free Edition! Why You Should DUMP Your Hedge Funds 6 Things You Didn't Know About Hedge Funds
Lists
The 10 Highest-Rated Videogames of All-Time
Car Recalls: The 10 Largest In U.S. History Include General Motors Company (GM), Ford Motor Company (F) & More
The Largest Newspapers In America: News Corp (NWSA) Holds No. 1
The 10 Best Videogame Weapons Of All-Time, From Electronic Arts Inc. (EA) To Nintendo
Tesla Motors Inc (TSLA), SolarCity Corp (SCTY) Not Elon Musks Only Projects
The 10 Deadliest Airplane Crashes in History
Electronic Arts Inc. (EA)s Top 10 E3 Premiers
Elon Musks Twitter Account: His 10 Greatest Tweets
The 10 Most Exciting Next-Gen Games For The Xbox One and PS4
The 16 Most Beautiful Apple Inc. (AAPL) Retail Stores
About Us Contact Us Terms Of Use Privacy Policy
Next Post
Home Hedge Funds Markets Blog Authors About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Site Map
All text and design is copyright 2016 Koala Guide LLC. All rights reserved.