What are Genetically Modified Organisms?
Need help? 1-800-476-0016
About Us
About Dr. Group
Our Company
Careers
Contact Us
My Account
My Account
My Orders
Start a return
My Cart

News
Cleansing & Detox
Lifestyle 
Fitness & Weight Loss
Food
Recipes
Vegan
Green Living
Men's Health
Women's Health
Mental Wellness
Health Conditions 
Allergies
Constipation
Hormones
Inflammation
Sleep / Fatigue
Natural Remedies
Herbs
Toxins
Videos
Article Categories:
News
Cleansing & Detox
Fitness & Weight Loss
Food
Recipes
Vegan
Green Living
Men's Health
Women's Health
Mental Wellness
Allergies
Constipation
Hormones
Inflammation
Sleep / Fatigue
Natural Remedies
Herbs
Toxins
Videos
Blog Home  Food Articles, Lifestyle Articles, Toxin Articles  What are Genetically Modified Organisms?
What are Genetically Modified Organisms?
by Dr. Edward Group DC, NP, DACBN,
DCBCN, DABFM
Published on June 26, 2013,
Last Updated on June 19, 2014
Email
Print
Share
For two decades, scientists have been creating genetically modified organisms by altering the core genetic make-up of plants and animals by adding new genetic material into DNA. Genetic manipulation gives scientists the ability to create any new trait they wish, or suppress natural traits they dont want. Genetic manipulation typically involves introducing genetic attributes to a host that are not from the host. For example, splicing genetic information from fish into corn. By definition, genetic manipulation is unnatural and the traits created by these radical alterations would likely never evolve naturally. In my opinion, toying with genetics is extremely dangerous and may affect your health; its already affected the economy, the way the farm industry operates, and the worlds food supply.
Were Being Kept in the Dark
In the United States, roughly 70% of processed foods contain GMOs and up to 80% of the crops grown are GMO. Corn, followed by soybeans, has become the most prevalent crop in the United States. This is not because corn on the cob, kernel corn, or creamed corn has become immensely popular. It is because the biochemical industry has significantly altered and monopolized corn production and the food industry uses corn in a way to create food the same way nurdles are used to create plastic goods. Corn in barbecue sauce? Yes, check the label.
Despite the influx of GMO crops, its often not clear which consumables have been genetically manipulated. This is because currently, in the United States, food companies are not required to tell you if their products contain GMOs. The federal government has declared its their choice, not yours, to know whats in the food you eat.
GMOs are Bad for the World
Agro-chemical companies are seeking financial domination and GMOs are the ticket. When companies create GMO crops, the crops are no longer natural plants; they become the intellectual property of the companies that own them. This allows companies like Monsanto to control the worlds food supply by owning the genetic makeup and seeds of all crops grown. Farmers can no longer simply grow crops, they have to grow Monsantos crops and pay Monsanto for the privilege, negatively affecting humanity and the economy.
Furthermore, Monsanto and AstraZeneca have developed copy-protection-like traits, dubbed Genetic Use Restriction Technology (T-GURT), which can cause plants to produce sterile seeds (meaning farmers have to buy seeds and cannot harvest their own). And, even if this is not used, many biochemical companies require farmers to sign agreements that they will not save any of their seeds for re-planting. Essentially, farm management has been taken away from farmers and given, on a silver platter, to multinational conglomerate corporations.
Even worse, GMOs are bred to contain fewer natural traits, including defense mechanisms, and require more pesticides and herbicides. For example, if youve ever heard the phrase Roundup Ready it means the crop in question has been bred to resist endless amounts of Monsantos well-known poison- Roundup. Unfortunately, the increased use of chemicals has also lead to super bug and weed strains that cannot be controlled at all.
The Health Dangers of GMO Foods
The problem with GMO foods extends well beyond the environmental, philosophical, and economical horrors. GMO foods raise significant health concerns and have since 1992 when Calgene introduced the Flavr Savr, the first genetically modified tomato that the FDA approved for use in 1994  without requiring labeling. Even more troubling, the government decided that because the Flavr Savr performed so well in tests that its results would stand for any GMO produce and no further testing would be required before presenting it to consumers. The problem? The FDA suppressed reports describing deaths and stomach lesions in rats that had eaten the Flavr Savr. The Flavr Savr failure has not been an isolated incident.
A study of people in the Philippines reported that their bodies developed antibodies to Bt toxin, meaning their body processed engineered traits and reacted to them. The same consumers of the GMO corn in the Philippines developed a resistance to ampicillin. Antibiotic resistance is something that science hadnt counted on, which is indicative of questionable experimentation. It makes me wonder if there is a bigger picture at hand. Maybe to create more illness and sell you more pharmaceuticals?
In 1996, it was shown that genes spliced from Brazil nuts into soybeans produced severe allergic reaction dangers, including anaphylactic shock which could lead to death.
GMOs are a black eye on America and some other countries want nothing to do with them. In 2006, Japan suspended long grain rice imports from the US after tests revealed that the rice contained trace amounts of GMO that were not approved for human consumption.
How to Eliminate Toxic Genetically Modified Foods From Your Diet
Eat natural foods. Shop at your local farmers market. The majority of your food should not be packaged or include a barcode.
Eat organically grown fruit and vegetables. Organic crops are grown using no genetic modification, toxic pesticides, or herbicides.
Be specifically vigilant about only choosing organic varieties of popcorn and corn. Most corn has been extensively modified.
If youre not in close proximity to industrial plants or bioengineered farms, start your own organic garden.
If you consume meat or dairy, only choose hormone and antibiotic-free, organic, range-fed products.
Avoid canola oil and cottonseed oil; use organic grape seed oil, virgin coconut oil, hempseed oil, or olive oil instead.
Take action. Let your elected officials and grocery executives know that you want GMO free foods to be available and promoted.
Avoid GMOs
Corn, soy, alfalfa (fed to cows), canola, and sugar beets are among the top grown GMO crops. Its also worth mentioning that with regard to sugar beets, over half the sugar beets grown are GMO and 90% of the sugar consumed in America comes from sugar beets- another reason to avoid sugar. Its up to you to do your own research. I recommend visiting the Center for Food Safety for a comprehensive list of foods and brands that contain GMOs.
Results may vary. Information and statements made are for education purposes and are not intended to replace the advice of your doctor. Global Healing Center does not dispense medical advice, prescribe, or diagnose illness. The views and nutritional advice expressed by Global Healing Center are not intended to be a substitute for conventional medical service. If you have a severe medical condition or health concern, see your physician.
David
Bunch of nutjobs. The economical damages are clear, but your body breaks food down into its base components before it can enter the blood, you can not absorb genetic traits, its a physical impossibility.
DrM
Naturalpaths are not real doctors peopleno med school, no internship,no real science.
believeinscience
What is your source for the allegation that gmos
caused stomach lesions in rats? The only reference I can find is yours  not very convincing.
ghc_health
Here you go-
http://www.scribd.com/doc/106376574/GMO-Toxicology
Pingback: Natural Label Doesnt Always Mean GMO Free | secrets-1.com()
Pingback: Something Innately Wrong about New GM Potato  You Can Help! | secrets-1.com()
Pingback: 8 Shocking Facts About GMOs | secrets-1.com()
Alan8
I dont understand why any sane farmer would start using these seeds.
Also Im not THAT worried about sugar from GM beets; its highly purified and sugar is sugar.
Its the GMO proteins that have me worried.
Pingback: Join The FoodJustice March Against Monsanto In Washington DC! (VIDEOS) | Revere Radio Network()
Pingback: Coconut Oil  Health Benefits  On The Run Meals()
Pingback: 8 Shocking Facts About GMOs !  House of Healthy Food()
DoubtingThomas
That retraction is awfully convenient for GMO producers. Also, there is a big difference between junk science and criticisms with the sample size.
View Comments (12)
Related PostsWhat is the Bt Toxin?Help the Organic Consumers Association Fight for GMO Labeling on FoodWhat is Glyphosate? (Video)FDA Approves New GMO Foods Apples and Potatoes
This entry was posted in Food Articles, Lifestyle Articles, Toxin Articles
Top Selling Supplements
Colon Cleanser
Oxy-Powder is the top quality colon cleanser. Promotes optimal colon health and regular bowel activity. Learn More
Liver Cleanse Kit
This complete liver cleansing kit is a comprehensive approach to cleansing your liver. Learn More
Likes
Subscribers
Followers
Followers
Take Control of Your Health Receive daily or monthly health news.
Monthly Newsletter
Daily Digest
PopularThe Benefits of Apple Cider Vinegar (931)6 Home Remedies for Acid Reflux (507)14 Foods that Cleanse the Liver (491)17 Health Benefits of Cayenne Pepper (467)10 Natural Remedies for Kidney Stones (392)
Take Control of Your Health, Join Our Newsletter!
Email:
Join the GHC Community!
Our Company
About Us
Contact Us
Careers
Health Articles
Health Newsletter
Learning Center
Press and Media
En Espaol
SHOPPING
Detox/Cleansing
Health Kits
Supplements
Skin Care
Pets
Specials
Books & DVDs
MY ACCOUNT
Login/Register
Forgot Password?
My Orders
Shopping Cart
QUICK HELP
Contact Us
Shipping Policy
Return an Item
Find a Distributor
Become an Affiliate
Become a Distributor
Global Healing Center | 2040 North Loop West, Ste. 108 | Houston, Texas 77018Telephone: 713-476-0016 | Toll Free: 1-800-476-0016
These statements have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. These products are not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease.
All testimonials and product reviews are authentic from actual customers. Documentation is available for legal inspection. Product reviews are within range of typicality.
Information and statements made are for education purposes and are not intended to replace the advice of your treating doctor. Global Healing Center does not dispense medical advice, prescribe, or diagnose illness. The views and nutritional advice expressed by Global Healing Center are not intended to be a substitute for conventional medical service. If you have a severe medical condition or health concern, see your physician. This Web site contains links to Web sites operated by other parties. Such links are provided for your convenience and reference only. We are not responsible for the content or products of any linked site or any link contained in a linked site. Global Healing Center does not adopt any medical claims which may have been made in 3rd party references. Where Global Healing Center has control over the posting or other communications of such claims to the public, Global Healing Center will make its best effort to remove such claims.
 Copyright 1998 - 2016 | All Rights Reserved http://www.globalhealingcenter.com
Site Map | Terms of Use | Privacy Policy
 Copyright 1998 - 2016 | All Rights Reserved http://www.globalhealingcenter.com