genetically modified organism (GMO) - GMOs in medicine and research | Britannica.com
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Search
Click here to search
Genetically modified organism (GMO)
Table of Contents
Written By:
Julia M. Diaz
Judith L. Fridovich-Keil
Last Updated:
9-5-2016
See Article History
Alternative Title:
GMO
GMOs in medicine and research
Related Topics
genetic engineering
manufacturing
engineering
recombinant DNA technology
heredity
Sir Martin J. Evans
bioengineering
Mario R. Capecchi
biotechnology
pharming
GMOs have emerged as one of the mainstays of biomedical research since the 1980s. For example, GM animal models of human genetic diseases enabled researchers to test novel therapies and to explore the roles of candidate risk factors and modifiers of disease outcome. GM microbes, plants, and animals also revolutionized the production of complex pharmaceuticals by enabling the generation of safer and cheaper vaccines and therapeutics. Pharmaceutical products range from recombinant hepatitis B vaccine produced by GM bakers yeast to injectable insulin (for diabetics) produced in GM Escherichia coli bacteria and to factor VIII (for hemophiliacs) and tissue plasminogen activator (tPA, for heart attack or stroke patients), both of which are produced in GM mammalian cells grown in laboratory culture. Furthermore, GM plants that produce edible vaccines are under development. An edible vaccine is an antigenic protein that is produced in the consumable parts of a plant (e.g., fruit) and absorbed into the bloodstream when the parts are eaten. Once absorbed into the body, the protein stimulates the immune system to produce antibodies against the pathogen from which the antigen was derived. Such vaccines could offer a safe, inexpensive, and painless way to provide vaccines, particularly in less-developed regions of the world, where the limited availability of refrigeration and sterile needles has been problematic for some traditional vaccines. Novel DNA vaccines may be useful in the struggle to prevent diseases that have proved resistant to traditional vaccination approaches, including HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and cancer.A researcher transferring cells into culture flasks during cloning research.Matthew Pace/Getty ImagesGenetic modification of insects has become an important area of research, especially in the struggle to prevent parasitic diseases. For example, GM mosquitoes have been developed that express a small protein called SM1, which blocks entry of the malaria parasite, Plasmodium, into the mosquitos gut. This results in the disruption of the parasites life cycle and renders the mosquito malaria-resistant. Introduction of these GM mosquitoes into the wild could help reduce transmission of the malaria parasite. In another example, male Aedes aegypti mosquitoes engineered with a method known as the sterile insect technique transmit a gene to their offspring that causes the offspring to die before becoming sexually mature. In field trials in a Brazil suburb, A. aegypti populations declined by 95 percent following the sustained release of sterile GM males.
Similar Topics
gene editing
DNA sequencing
whole genome sequencing
recombinant DNA technology
Finally, genetic modification of humans via gene therapy is becoming a treatment option for diseases ranging from rare metabolic disorders to cancer. Coupling stem cell technology with recombinant DNA methods allows stem cells derived from a patient to be modified in the laboratory to introduce a desired gene. For example, a normal beta-globin gene may be introduced into the DNA of bone marrow-derived hematopoietic stem cells from a patient with sickle cell anemia; introduction of these GM cells into the patient could cure the disease without the need for a matched donor.Role of GMOs in environmental managementAnother application of GMOs is in the management of environmental issues. For example, some bacteria can produce biodegradable plastics, and the transfer of that ability to microbes that can be easily grown in the laboratory may enable the wide-scale greening of the plastics industry. In the early 1990s, Zeneca, a British company, developed a microbially produced biodegradable plastic called Biopol (polyhydroxyalkanoate, or PHA). The plastic was made with the use of a GM bacterium, Ralstonia eutropha, to convert glucose and a variety of organic acids into a flexible polymer. GMOs endowed with the bacterially encoded ability to metabolize oil and heavy metals may provide efficient bioremediation strategies.Sociopolitical relevance of GMOs
Test Your Knowledge
Science Quiz
While GMOs offer many potential benefits to society, the potential risks associated with them have fueled controversy, especially in the food industry. Many skeptics warn about the dangers that GM crops may pose to human health. For example, genetic manipulation may potentially alter the allergenic properties of crops. Whether some GM crops, such as golden rice, deliver on the promise of improved health benefits is also unclear. The release of GM mosquitoes and other GMOs into the environment also raised concerns. More-established risks were associated with the potential spread of engineered crop genes to native flora and the possible evolution of insecticide-resistant superbugs.
Britannica Stories
In The News / Sports & Recreation
Mozart of Chess Defends Title
Demystified / Food
Whats the Difference Between Whiskey and Whisky? What About Scotch, Bourbon, and Rye?
Spotlight / Science
A Recent History of Climate Change
In The News / Society
Scandal in South Korea
See All Stories
From the late 1990s, the European Union (EU) addressed such concerns by implementing strict GMO labeling laws. In the early 2000s, all GM foods and GM animal feeds in the EU were required to be labeled if they consisted of or contained GM products in a proportion greater than 0.9 percent. By contrast, in the United States, foods containing GM ingredients did not require special labeling, though the issue was hotly debated at national and state levels. Many opponents of GM products focused their arguments on unknown risks to food safety. However, despite the concerns of some consumer and health groups, especially in Europe, numerous scientific panels, including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, concluded that consumption of GM foods was safe, even in cases involving GM foods with genetic material from very distantly related organisms. The strict regulations on GM products in the EU have been a source of tension in agricultural trade. In the late 1990s, the EU declared a moratorium on the import and use of GM crops. However, the banwhich led to trade disputes with other countries, particularly the United States, where GM foods had been accepted openlywas considered unjustified by the World Trade Organization. In consequence, the EU implemented regulatory changes that allowed for the import of certain GM crops. Within Europe, however, only one GM crop, a type of insect-resistant corn (maize), was cultivated. Some countries, including certain African states, had likewise rejected GM products. Still other countries, such as Canada, China, Argentina, and Australia, had open policies on GM foods.The use of GMOs in medicine and research has produced a debate that is more philosophical in nature. For example, while genetic researchers believe they are working to cure disease and ameliorate suffering, many people worry that current gene therapy approaches may one day be applied to produce designer children or to lengthen the natural human life span. Similar to many other technologies, gene therapy and the production and application of GMOs can be used to address and resolve complicated scientific, medical, and environmental issues, but they must be used wisely.Julia M. DiazJudith L. Fridovich-KeilThe Editors of Encyclopdia Britannica
Previous page
Introduction
Table of Contents
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article!
Contact our editors with your feedback.
More about genetically modified organism (GMO)
3 References found in Britannica ArticlesAssorted Referencesbiotechnology
(in biotechnology)
recombinant DNA technology
(in recombinant DNA technology: Genetically modified organisms)
trans fats
(in trans fat: Trans-fat alternatives)
Additional Reading
External Links
Environmental Protection Agency - Licensing and Permitting - Genetically Modified Organism
European Food Safety Authority - Genetically Modified Organism
LiveScience - GMOs: Facts About Genetically Modified Food
Article Contributors
Article History
MEDIA FOR:
genetically modified organism (GMO)
Previous
Next
Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
Pinterest
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
Edit Mode
Genetically modified organism (GMO)
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
Table of Contents
Tips For Editing
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind.
Encyclopdia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
Leave Edit Mode
You are about to leave edit mode.
Your changes will be lost unless you select "Submit".
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
Thank You for Your Contribution!
Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article.
Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed.
OK, Continue to Article
Uh Oh
There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later.
Close
Keep Exploring Britannica
7 Celebrities You Didnt Know Were Inventors
Since 1790 there have been more than eight million patents issued in the U.S. Some of them have been given to great inventors. Thomas Edison received more than 1,000. Many have been given to ordinary people...
anthropology
the science of humanity, which studies human beings in aspects ranging from the biology and evolutionary history of Homo sapiens to the features of society and culture that decisively distinguish humans...
6 Signs Its Already the Future
Sometimeswhen watching a good sci-fi movie or stuck in traffic or failing to brew a perfect cup of coffeewe lament the fact that we dont have futuristic technology
now. But future tech may...
Science: Fact or Fiction?
Take this quiz at encyclopedia britannica to test your knowledge about science facts.
Science Quiz
Take this quiz at encyclopedia britannica to test your knowledge about science.
General Science: Fact or Fiction?
Take this General Science True or False Quiz at Encyclopedia Britannica to test your knowledge of paramecia, fire, and other characteristics of science.
10 Inventions That Changed Your World
You may think you cant live without your tablet computer and your cordless electric drill, but what about the inventions that came before them? Humans have been innovating since the dawn of time to get...
homologous recombination
the exchange of genetic material between two strands of DNA that contain long stretches of similar base sequences. Homologous recombination occurs naturally in eukaryotic organisms, bacteria, and certain...
quantum mechanics
science dealing with the behaviour of matter and light on the atomic and subatomic scale. It attempts to describe and account for the properties of molecules and atoms and their constituents electrons,...
atom
smallest unit into which matter can be divided without the release of electrically charged particles. It also is the smallest unit of matter that has the characteristic properties of a chemical element....
education
discipline that is concerned with methods of teaching and learning in schools or school-like environments as opposed to various nonformal and informal means of socialization (e.g., rural development projects...
computer
device for processing, storing, and displaying information. Computer once meant a person who did computations, but now the term almost universally refers to automated electronic machinery. The first section...
View More
Stay Connected
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Pinterest
Newsletters
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
2016 Encyclopdia Britannica, Inc.
Menu
Home
Stories
Quizzes
Galleries
Lists
Login
Join
Search
Search
search
Genetically modified organism (GMO)
Table of Contents
Contents
IntroductionGMOs in agricultureGMOs in medicine and researchRole of GMOs in environmental managementSociopolitical relevance of GMOs
Media
Print
Print
Please select which sections you would like to print:
Cite
Cite
Contributors:
Julia M. Diaz and Judith L. Fridovich-Keil
Article Title:
genetically modified organism (GMO)
Website Name:
Encyclopdia Britannica
Publisher:
Encyclopdia Britannica, inc.
Date Published:
September 05, 2016
URL:
https://www.britannica.com/science/genetically-modified-organism/GMOs-in-medicine-and-research
Access Date:
December 01, 2016
Share
Share
Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
Email
Feedback
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article.
Select feedback type:
Select a type (Required)
Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction
Link Correction
Additional Information
Other
If you are interested in being contacted for follow-up or potentially receiving contributor credit for implemented edits, please register or login.
Submit Feedback
If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode
(requires login).
Thank you for your feedback
Our editors will review what youve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
Search
Email this page
Email to
Email from
Subject
Comments
Cancel
Send
