Genetically Optimized vs. Genetically Modified Organisms
Newsletter FAQ | Cancel Any Time | We Value Your Privacy
Wall Street Daily
Home
Innovation
GeoMacro
Special Situations
Contributors
Free Reports
Archives
About Us
Home
Innovation
GeoMacro
Special Situations
Contributors
Free Reports
Archives
About Us
WSD Team
Contact Us
Archives
Ensure Email Delivery
Frequently Asked Questions
Broker Listing
Genetically Optimized vs. Genetically Modified Organisms
Published Tue, Sep 27, 2016
|
David Dittman, Editorial Director
It sounds like the tagline of an action-thriller: What could be born of a union between The Worlds Most Evil Corporation, Monsanto Co. (MON), and The Worlds Most Powerful Gene-Editing Tool, CRISPR/Cas9?
Well, what it wont be is a genetically modified organism, or GMO, The Worlds Most Notorious Acronym. Thats according to responses from the U.S. Department of Agriculture to a pair of Regulated Article Letters of Inquiry made public in April 2016.
Monsanto and E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. (DD) are hoping CRISPR/Cas9  which uses a naturally occurring enzyme to edit DNA  puts the period to a long-running agricultural controversy.
The USDA has chosen not to designate crops created by DuPont and Caribou Biosciences using their own CRISPR techniques as GMOs. CRISPR results in genetically optimized, rather than modified, organisms, because theres no foreign DNA introduced to the original organism.
This is because the process does not involve transgenics  the act of removing genetic material from one species and placing it in another to give the destination organism a trait or traits not ordinarily found in that species.
Monsanto and E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. are hoping CRISPR/Cas9  which uses a naturally occurring enzyme to edit DNA  puts the period to a long-running agricultural controversy.
This alphabet soup will also eventually include the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration  also known as the EPA and the FDA.
Penn State researcher Yinong Yang recently used the CRISPR/Cas9 science to grow anti-browning mushrooms. Of the project, Yang explained that the genome-edited mushroom has small deletions in a specific gene but contains no foreign DNA integration in its genome.
Though this development initially renders it exempt from USDA regulatory review, the Administration did write in a letter to Yang: Please be advised that your white button mushroom variety described in your letter may still be subject to other regulatory authorities such as FDA or EPA.
So its too soon to say with absolute certainty that a CRISPR/Cas9 organism is not, from a regulatory perspective, genetically modified.
And there are plenty of folks out there ready to argue the case, in the U.S. and in Europe, where the war on GMOs originated.
For now, however, Monsanto  whose $66 billion merger with Bayer AG (BAYRY) has raised plenty of opposition from food safety advocates around the world  has inked a global licensing agreement for the use of the CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing technology in agriculture with MITs and Harvards Broad Institute.
As Monsanto explains in its September 22 press release announcing the partnership: Genome-editing technologies, such as CRISPR-Cas, offer a way for scientists to promote site-directed integration of specific genes as well as the opportunity to enhance beneficial or remove undesired plant characteristics. These techniques will enable plant breeders to deliver better hybrids and varieties more efficiently.
Terms of the agreement strictly limit Monsantos use of the technique to seed development, an area where the agribusiness giant has generated a lot of consternation among Europeans and Americans fearful of Frankenfoods.
Its too soon to say with absolute certainty that a CRISPR/Cas9 organism is not, from a regulatory perspective, genetically modified.
What CRISPR/Cas9 will help Monsanto do is, ultimately, develop even more crops that are drought resistant and create cooking oils with more desirable nutritional profiles.
It is critically important, however, that Monsanto is not permitted to use CRISPR/Cas9 for so-called gene drive, a technique that attempts to force a specific gene to be inherited by a species offspring. This kind of cellular machinery has its upsides. But there are enormous unknowns as well.
According to Issi Rozen, chief business officer of the Broad Institute, Genome-editing techniques present precise ways to dramatically improve the scale and discovery efficiency of new research that can improve human health and global agriculture.
We are encouraged to see these tools being used to help deliver responsible solutions to help farmers meet the demands of our growing population.
The concern about out-of-control propagation  in addition to lack of understanding about how GMOs impact humans who consume crops generated from such seeds  is what drives anti-GMO activists around the world.
So will Monsanto be the force to weaponize CRISPR/Cas9?
Thats one of those ponderable imponderables  within the realm of possibility but still a low-probability outcome.
Rather, what were more likely to see is a greater concentrated effort to develop drought-resistant strains of key staple crops such as corn, rice, soybeans, and wheat.
Monsantos stated game is yield. And yield is all about producing an increasing supply of staple crops from a shrinking supply of arable farmland around the world.
So will Monsanto be the force to weaponize CRISPR/Cas9?
And climate change is only exacerbating that problem.
According to a recent study published by the journal Nature Communications:
Strong reductions in attainable yields of major cereal crops are found across a large fraction of current cropland by 2050. These areas are vulnerable to climate change and have greatly reduced opportunity for agricultural intensification. However, the total land area, including regions not currently used for crops, climatically suitable for high attainable yields of maize, wheat, and rice is similar by 2050 to the present day. Large shifts in land-use patterns and crop choice will likely be necessary to sustain production growth rates and keep pace with demand.
In this kind of context, with shrinking farmland and rising temperatures, its imperative that we find new ways to increase staple yields. One way to do that is by developing new strains of corn, rice, soybeans, and wheat.
Food security is a complex dilemma.
Are we talking GMO Frankenfood or genetically optimized staple crops?
At the same time, even as were finding better ways to do things, this whole campaign against GMOs has been dismissed as full of fearmongering and fraud.
Indeed, a Harvard geneticist recently told Business Insider that CRISPR/Cas9s agricultural applications are a beautiful thing.
Man, after all, must eat. It may not be a thing of beauty, but it sure is a necessity.
This Week In
Prudence, via Shane Parrish of Farnam Street:
Think of how many policies, procedures and systems of organization which forget this basic truth; systems of political control, price control, social control and behavioral control  from bad workplaces to bad governments  whichhave failed so miserably because they refused to account forthe underlying motivations of the people in the system, and failed to do a second-step analysis of the consequences of their policies.
Its just as true in personal relations: How often do we fail to treat others correctly because we havent taken their point of view, motivations, aspirations, and desires properly into account? How often is our own system of relations built on faulty assumptions that dont actually work for us? (The old marriage advice You can either be right, or be happy is pure goldwisdom in this sense.)
Smart investing,
David Dittman
Editorial Director David Dittman is an investment newsletter professional with more than 10 years' experience at staff, management, and strategic levels. Before joining
Wall Street Daily he was Chief Investment Strategist for Utility Forecaster, Canadian Edge, and Australian Edge. David, who was present at the creation of several highly successful newsletters, founded and wrote the noted e-letter Maple Leaf Memo.
Learn More >>
Newsletter FAQ | Cancel Any Time | We Value Your Privacy
Related Articles
The Biggest Biotech Discovery of the Century
Bacteria: The Good, The Bad, and The Designer
Pass the Seaweed: Notes From Thanksgiving Future
Artificial Intelligence vs. Human Intelligence
Add Comment Cancel reply
Name (required, will be published)
Mail (required, will not be published)
Website
Click to cancel reply
Newsletter FAQ
|
Cancel Any Time |
We Value Your Privacy
Innovation
Artificial Intelligence vs. Human Intelligence
By David Dittman - Nov 30, 2016
Artificial intelligence is a concept thats already impacting our modern world. Some see a robot war brewing. But the real future is one of cooperation: AI plus HI.
GeoMacro
Does Donald Trump Really Hate Science?
By David Dittman - Nov 15, 2016
Donald Trump ran a campaign on hyperbole and vagueness. Now as he prepares to take office, we take a closer look at his contradictory statements on science to make sense of the future of our favored industries.
Special Situations
Want to Save the World? Get Off Your Ass!
By David Dittman - Dec 1, 2016
Ultimately, it may not matter what amazing innovations we create in the next millennia, because unless we shape up, we wont be around long enough to enjoy them.
SEARCH
Search for:
Search
Powered by Ajaxy
premium research
True Alpha
VentureCap Strategist
Extreme Alpha
company
About
Contributors
Contact Us
Whitelist Instructions
Privacy Policy
Disclaimer
Syndicate Us
FAQ
learn more
Free Reports
Premium Research
Income
Growth
Commodities
Geomacro
Money
Trading
Funds
Saturday Spotlight
contact us
T. 1.800.708.1020
T. 410.454.0499
F. 410.864.1650
808 St Paul St.Baltimore, MD21202
 2016 Wall Street Daily, LLC. All rights reserved.