GMO Defined | GMO Awareness
GMO Awareness
Raising awareness about the risks of genetically modified foods (GMOs) | Alimento Transgnicos | Conscience OGM | Gentechnologie | Conciencia Transgnicos | Nei til GMO | Sin Transgnicos | Wolni od GMO | Libre de Transgnicos
Search
Main menu
Skip to primary content
Home
All About GMOs
GMO Defined
GMO Risks
GMO Timeline  A History of Genetically Modified Foods
GMO Science, Sources and Relationships
GMO and the FDA
Articles About GMOs
Resources
5 Things You Can Do
GMO Brochures
GMO News Sources
Movies to Watch  GMO and More
Books to Read About the Food System
GMOs Who Ya Gonna Call?
Articles About the Food System
More About Glyphosate (RoundUp)
More About Monsanto
Anti-GMO Groups  United States
Anti-GMO Groups  Canada
Anti-GMO Groups  International
Shopping List
Overview
GMO-Free Brands
Family-Owned Organic GMO-Free Brands
Corporate Organic Brands
Local Farms, CSAs and Restaurants
Non-GMO Seeds and Animal Feed
Online Organic Shopping
Organic Coupons
Smart Phone Apps
Avoid List
Overview
GMO Sodas
GMO Juice Drinks
GMO Soups
GMO Ingredients
About
GMO Defined
GMO stands for Genetically Modified Organism. Other names for the process include Genetic Engineering (GE) or Genetic Modification (GM), which are one and the same.
How is a GMO Different from Hybridization / Cross-Breeding?
Genetic modification is the process of forcing genes from one species into another entirely unrelated species. Unlike cross breeding or hybridizationboth of which involve two related speciesand have been done without ill effects for centuriesgenetic engineering forcefully breaches the naturally-occuring barriers between species.
Example: Corn+ DNA from soil bacteria that is naturally immune to RoundUp herbicide + e.coli bacteria + soil bacteria that causes tumors in plants (which enables the plants cell wall to be breached) = RoundUp Ready Corn (one of several RoundUp Ready crops engineered by Monsanto).
Other examples of GMOs include strawberries and tomatoes injected with fish genes to protect the fruit from freezing, goats injected with spider genes to produce milk with proteins stronger than kevlar for use in industrial products, salmon that are genetically engineered with a growth hormone that allow them to keep growing larger, dairy cows injected withthe genetically engineered hormone rBGH (also known as rBST) to increase milk production, and rice injected with human genes to produce pharmaceuticals.
How are Crops Genetically Modified?
Foreign DNA is inserted into the primary plant species using one of three methods:
E.coli bacteria is combined with a soil bacteria that causes tumors that allows the foreign bacteria to breach the host plants cells.
Electricity is applied to the host plant to rupture its cell walls, thus allowing the foreign DNA to invade; or
A gene gun blasts the engineered DNA directly into the plants cells.
For a more visual explanation, watchthis video(the process graphics begin at the 2.20 minute mark).
Because the injected genes can come from bacteria, viruses, insects, animals or even humans, GMOs are also known as transgenic organisms. Because genes operate in a complex network in ways that are still not fully understood(as discovered during the Human Genome Research Project), genetic engineering can result inboth known and unknown / unintended consequences.
What is the Intended Outcome of Genetic Modification?
The websites and marketing materials of the companies that are conducting genetic modification would have you believe that GMOs will feed the worlds ever growing, hungry populationwith greater crop yields, more drought resistance, increased nutrition, and other worthy-sounding benefits.
However after nearly two decades of development, none of these traits have come to market. View a list of the top ten genetically modified cropsand seewhich genetically engineered traits are most predominant.
Instead, nearly 100% of genetic modification is devoted to theincreased use of herbicides and pesticides, which these ag-bio corporations also develop and sell. The majority of their research and development has been focused on genetically altering plants to do one of two things:
To produce their own internal pesticide to kill or deter insects; and
To remain alive when repeatedly sprayed with weedkillers that are manufactured by these same corporations, including glyphosate (aka RoundUp), glufosinate, and 2-4,D (one of the primary ingredients of Agent Orange).
Some crops are genetically engineered withbothherbicide-resistant traits; soy was recently genetically engineered to withstand all three.
So whats the real motive? Profit.
Genetically modified seeds can be patented as intellectual property, which enables GMOs to be owned, sold,controlled, and legally protectedby a corporation, giving these corporations ultimate power over food. No surprise these corporations have focused on genetically modifying corn and soy, since these two products are used in almost 90% of processed food for humans, and in 100% of the grain fed to (non-organic) animals raised for meat.
Why is our food being made and modified
by the worlds largest pesticide manufacturer?
What Corporations Manufacture GMOs?
The #1 company developing GMO plants and controlling the largest market share of GMO crops in the worldis the same company selling the weedkiller called RoundUp: Monsanto.
GMOs are the latest innovation in Monsantos long line-up ofquestionable products, includingAgent Orange, PCBs, DDT, Dioxin, Aspartame, Saccharain, rBGH / rBST,and Terminator Seeds that grow for only one season, forcing farmers to buy their genetically modified seeds each year instead of saving seeds from the prior harvest as they have done for centuries.
No wonder Monsanto re-branded themselves from a chemical company to a bio-agricultural company back in 1997(with the new tag line imagine) GMOs, and the weedkillers they are engineered to withstand, are an extraordinarily profitable loop!
Other companies in the Big Six include Pioneer Hi-Bred International(a subsidiary of DuPont),Syngenta AG,Dow Agrosciences(a subsidiary of Dow Chemical,BASF(which isprimarily a chemical company that is rapidly expanding their biotechnology division, andBayer Cropscience(a subsidiary of Bayer).
Read a report about the Big Six here >
View a complete list of companies doing genetic engineering on this website >
Where are GMOs found?
Although the list is changing all the time, GMOs are currently labeled, extremely restricted, or bannedin 64 countries, including the entireEuropean Union (United Kingdom, Norway, Luxembourg, Austria, Germany, France, Hungary, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, and Ireland).
They are also banned in Australia (but thats shifting now due to pressure from NuFarm/Monsanto, and the Aussies are not happy) andNew Zealand.
Elsewhere in the world, GMOs are similarly restricted or banned in Saudi Arabia, Syria, Algeria, Poland, Brazil, Paraguay, Peru, China, Japan, Thailand, the Philippines, Fiji, Sri Lanka, American Samoa, Cook Islands, Kiribati, Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
In Canada the debate is still underway: as far back as 1998, scientists employed by Health Canada who were concerned about human health impacts complained that they were being pressured to approve the GMO milk hormone, which is injected into cows to increase milk supply. They testified that the drug maker, Monsanto, offered them a bribe of over $1 million to approve it. They also reported that their research study documents were stolen from a locked file cabinet in a government office.
In response, a Monsanto official went on Canadian national television saying that the scientists had misunderstood an offer for research money.
March Against Monsanto in San Diego, California, May 2013
Here in the United States (where several of our largest corporations have a vested financial interest in GMOs), the proliferation of misinformation has resulted in very little progress: Maryland has banned genetically engineered fish; North Dakota and Montana filed bans on genetically engineered wheat; Burlington, Vermont declared a moratorium on genetically engineered food; Boulder, Colorado banned genetically engineered crops; and GM crops have been banned in the California counties of Mendocino, Trinity and Marin, the big island of Hawaii, and the San Juan county of Washington state.
As of 2013, after the FDAdenied more than 1 million signaturesin a national petition to label GMOs, more than two dozen states began working on state-wide labeling measures, includingMaine, Connecticut and Vermont.
But state efforts have not come without a price: Monsanto sued Vermont and Connecticuts GMO labeling measures into silence for over a year, and with donations from multiple large U.S. food manufacturers who rely on genetically engineered corn and soy, nearly $70 million was spent to confuse voters in California and Washington state into (narrowly) defeating GMO labeling propositions.
Even if some states are successful down the road, theres no guarantee that their efforts will be upheld: the U.S.Senate recently decided that it does not want to give states the authority to tell people if they are eating genetically modified foodwith a vote of 71 against 27.
What Foods Contain GMOs?
As of 2014, the USDA reports the following percent of all crops grown in the U.S. aregenetically modified:
 Soybeans  94% (up from 93% in 2013)
Corn  93% (up from 90% in 2013)*see note
 Cotton  96% (up from 90% in 2013)
 Sugar Beets  90% as of 2013 (2014 data not yet reported)
The following represent percentages from 2012, as no current data can be found on the USDA site:
 Canola  88%
 Hawaiian papaya  more than 50%
 Zucchini and Yellow Squash  small %
 Quest brand tobacco  100%
 Alfalfa (recently approved by the FDA; widely fed to animals to produce meat and milk)
 Kentucky Bluegrass (recently approved by the FDA; even more widely fed to animals to produce meat and milk; already an invasive grass in its natural state, it will spread even more uncontrollably with genetically engineered resistance to RoundUp)
 Farmed salmon (as of 2014, the FDA is still considering comments about their conditional approval of salmon containing a growth hormone)
*Because corn has been engineered to produce its own insecticide as it grows, the Environmental Protection Agency now regulates corn as an insecticide.
While this list may look short, the byproducts of these crops result in a far longer shopping list. GMOs are used in thousands of processed foods, ranging from infant formula to bread, tofu, and tomato sauce. Meanwhile GM feed is widely fed to animals that produce milk, eggs and meat, which means GMOs are also getting into products like ice cream, mayonnaise, cheese, and veggie burgers (whey protein!).Even non-food items such as cosmetics, soaps, detergents, shampoo and bubble bath often contain GMO ingredients.
According to a 2005 estimate by the Grocery Manufacturers of America, 75% of all processed foods in the U.S. contain at least one genetically modified ingredient.
Why Worry About GMOs?
The most common argument in favor of GMOs is that humans have been genetically engineering species for hundreds of years, resulting in larger corn plants, dog breeds that serve unique purposes, seedless grapes, and the like. But this too is another misleading statement. What humans have been doing for centuries is called hybridization. Hybridization is NOT genetic engineering.
Genetic engineering involves the combination of two entirely unrelated species in a labspecies that could never cross or coexist in nature and thus require complex techniques to forcefully combine the genes.
The second most common argument in favor of GMOs is the biotech industrys claims that the FDA has thoroughly evaluated GM foods and found them safe. This too is untrue.
For nearly two decades, NO studies have been performed on the human safety of GMO products  in fact the first research is only now emerging, and almost all of it is appearing only in countries outside of the U.S.
To date, no American scientist has investigated the levels of toxic residues in GMO foods.
There have been no studies to determine how much of the herbicidesandpesticidesthat are genetically engineered into the crops remain inside the plant, once it reaches our dinner plate.
There have likewise been no studies to determine how much toxic residue is left over on crops which are heavily saturated with additional pesticides and herbicides during their growth, because they were genetically engineered to withstand it (kills all the weeds around them, while they remain alive).
No long-term testing has been performed to assess the impacts of any of these toxic substances  neither on human health nor on the environment.
Mice born to mothers who were fed GM soy were smaller (mouse on right) and had higher mortality rates than control group mice (mouse on left)
What then, has been studied?
To date, any studies done that relate to GMOs have been performed on animals, with consistent, documented effects of GMO toxicity, including immune dysregulation (asthma, allergy, and inflammation); accelerated aging; infertility; dysregulation of genes associated with cholesterol synthesis, insulin regulation, cell signaling, and protein formation; as well as altered structure and function in the liver, kidney, pancreas, spleen and gastrointestinal system, still birth, birth defects, and early death.Details on a few of these animal studies can be foundhere.
Meanwhile, related studies on Glyphosate (the key ingredient in Monsantos RoundUp; for which the majority of GMO crops have been engineered to withstand) have uncovered a whole host of toxic effects in humans, plants and soil. View one of the manstudy reports here; watch an easy-to-understand (and very informative)interview video with the scientist byclicking here.
Why is there a lack of thorough evaluation?
Scientists who study genetically engineered crops are scorned if their research doesnt promote GMOs in a positive light.
The leading scientific journalScience Direct published a study in 2011 showingsignificant conflict of interestin so-called research done on the health risks and nutritional assessment of genetically modified products.
In2014,a comprehensive peer review of the Ag-Biotech industrys so called long term safety studies found them to be significantly inaccurate or flawed andno proof ofsafety.
Says Scientific American Magazine,Agritech companies have given themselves veto power over the work of independent researchers.
Key corporations responsible for genetic engineering aredoing everything in their power to prevent unbiased research, while distributingmass media greenwashing (or providing donor support topublic media sources such as NPR) to confuse Americans until theyre too frustrated to care whats really going on.
Yet despite the lack of human studies, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have all determined that genetically modified food is the same as, or substantially equivalent to, substances commonly found in food.
Which means GMO foods are not required to undergo specific safety tests prior to entering the market. If the makers of the GM foods claim that they are safe, the FDA has no further questions.
(If they truly are substantially the same, why are these corporations able to have them protected by intellectual property patents?)
In fact the FDA recently granted Monsanto the ability to conduct their own environmental impact studies. The 2012/2013 Farm Bill currently contains a rider that if passed as is, grants Monsanto complete immunity from FDA control over where and how they plant future GMO test crops.
If no less than 64 other countries in the worldhave laws in place to label, restrict, or outright ban GMO food and/or grains, why not the U.S.? Norman Braksick, President of Monsanto subsidiary Asgrow Seed, explained it way back in 1994: If you put a label on genetically engineered food, you might as well put a skull and crossbones on it. (Source: Kansas City Star, March 7, 1994.)
What is the Current Status of GMOs?
 GMOs are now present in the majority of processed foods consumed in the U.S. (unless theyre organic).
 US cancer rates are the 7th highest in the world, having skyrocketed during the same timeframe GMOs were introduced into our food.
 Superweeds and pesticide-resistant insects are evolving out of control.
 2-4,D (one of the two primary ingredients in Agent Orange)has been approvedto kill superweeds, and soy has been genetically engineered towithstandit.
 Natural crops are being infected through cross-pollination; some are developing a form of auto-immune dysfunction that causes plants to die before harvest.
 Fish, wildlife and insects are being born with defects, infertility, or dying prematurely, either from direct exposure or consuming exposed prey.
 Bees, which we rely upon to pollinate our crops, are dying at unprecedented rates whether due to the increase in herbicides that came about during the rapid adoption of herbicide-resistant GMO crops, or colony collapse disorder, or a relationship between the two no definitive cause has been determined.
 Monarch butterflies are likewise dying at unprecedented rates as a direct result of the herbicides used in conjunction with GMO crops.
 Theres been a massive increase in pesticide use from the time genetically engineered crops were introduced in 1996 through 2011. Click here to read the original study.
 As pesticides gradually kill soil microorganisms, crops become reliant onfossil fuel fertilizers.
 Millions of acres of soil and the natural aquifers underneath the soil are being saturated with toxins, due to the ever-increasing use of herbicides and pesticides to counteract resistant weeds and insects.
 Coincidentally during the same two decades, our national health costs have tripled, while our overall national health has sunk lower than almost all the civilized countries in the world.
How do the Ag-Bio Corporations Respond to These Problems?
 By creating self-terminating seeds, stronger herbicides, and deadlier pesticides.
 By continuing to tell the world they are improving crop yield and nutrition to Feed the World, even though they continue to focus more than 90% of their efforts on herbicide and pesticide resistance.
 By forcing organic companies to create 100 foot no-farming buffer zones around their fields, to prevent the GMO plants, seeds and pollens from invading.
 By suing the farmers when cross-pollination does occur, accusing them of patent infringement and non-payment of licensing, royalty, and seed fees.
 By suingany state that tries to pass GMO labeling requirements.
 By blocking attempts at scientific research when it doesnt present GMOs favorably.
 By creatingorganizations to mislead farmers and consumers.
 By lobbying the federal government to protect GM crops and prevent GM product labeling to the tune of $1.4 million in just the first 3 months of 2011.
 By focusing their current marketing efforts on third world countries with the promise of feeding their hungry.
 By labeling any public outcry  whether scientist or consumer  as misinformed, progress-phobic, anti-science propaganda.
How Do You Know Who to Believe?
If youre like us, youre feeling pretty overwhelmed at this point. The more you read, the more youre wondering how something like this could have gotten so far without your knowledge.
Please dont take our word for it. Do your own research. Yes, youll find some muddy waters when you do. Wherever possible, we encourage you to do what we did: ask these three key questions (courtesy of the Label GMOs website):
Who is conducting the research and what is their relationship with the biotech industry?
Who is funding the research? Who is their parent funder? And theirs? And theirs?
Who monetarily benefits from the results of the research?
Last but not least, when you read information from the FDA and USDA, take the time to investigate the names behind the statements, and do a quick Wikipedia search on those individuals. You may (or may not) be surprised to learn how many of the people currently employed by the FDA were formerly employed by key corporations responsible for genetic engineering before they were assigned to work for the FDA.
Since this technology is comparatively new, and there is still no data on the long term effects of human consumption of GMOs, are you comfortable being part of an experiment?
Sadly, most US consumers have no idea about any of this.
Its time to wake up and decide ifthe impact of GMO foods  on you, your family, and the environment  is a risk youre willing to take.
Where Can You Learn More?
To view (or download if you wish) a PDF document containing an in-depth, evidence-based examination of the Myths and Truths about GMOs written by a noted geneticist, click here.
To keep abreast of breaking news, information and helpful recommendations about avoiding GMOs, consider liking ourGMO Awareness Facebook page.

 GMO-Awareness.com 20112014. Unauthorized use and/or duplication of this material without express and written permission from this blog is strictly prohibited. Excerpts and links may be used, provided that full and clear credit is given to GMO-Awareness.com with appropriate and specific links back to the original content.
Share this:EmailFacebookTwitterLike this:Like Loading...
124 thoughts on GMO Defined
Wilber Laliberty on December 23, 2011 at 5:59 am said:
Thanks for helping out, excellent information.
Reply 
GMO Awareness on October 30, 2012 at 6:20 pm said:
You are most welcome, thank you!
Reply 
Pingback: GMODefined: Why is our food being made and modified by the worlds largest pesticide manufacturer? | YOUR FOOD, YOUR HEALTH: Latest on BiotechAg, GMOs, Pesticides, Chemicals, CAFOs, BigAg | Scoop.it
serulin on November 5, 2012 at 2:19 pm said:
How to help fight against companies like this?
Reply 
GMO Awareness on November 5, 2012 at 4:37 pm said:
Serulin, up at the top of this blog is a link called Five Easy Things its a good place to start!
https://gmo-awareness.com/5-easy-things/
Reply 
Pingback: GMO Defined | GMO Awareness | Scoop.it
Pingback: 7 Foods to Avoid
Pingback: What Happened to that Re-Write I Promised? | Donna and the DogsDonna and the Dogs
Janna Higgins on March 12, 2013 at 6:58 pm said:
Can you recommend any scientific based articles on GMO in Salmon?
Reply 
GMO Awareness on March 13, 2013 at 11:50 am said:
Janna, here is an article in PDF form from the Center for Food Safety: http://www.centerforfoodsafety.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/CFS_FSR_GE_Fish.pdf
Reply 
Pingback: Vandana Shiva: Seeds must be in the hands of farmers | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: Environment and Conservation News | The latest news from the frontlines of Conservation and Environmental Activism
Tess on April 1, 2013 at 9:39 pm said:
It is beyond salvagable. As Gabriel told Constentine, Were f**ked!! Ive always kwown were nothing but microbes on a mudball in someones petri dish. Same thing!! . . . screwed!!!
Reply 
Pingback: Industry has become a fourth branch of government, and money a new religion | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: Pesticide Lobby Spends Millions To Defend Chemicals Tied To Bee Deaths (and in our food supply) | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: Why the Most Powerful Thing in the World is a Seed  And The Global Corporate Monopoly | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: Think Those Chemicals In Your Food Have Been Tested? | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: Tracking The Causes Of Massive Monarch Butterfly Decline  GMOs, Pesticides, Roundup | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: The Next GMO Biotech Wave: Extreme Synthetic Genetics. The Implications, The Ethics | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: The World According to Monsanto (FULL LENGTH) The Leader of the Biotech Cartel | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: GMOs for Newbies | RealFoodGirl:Unmodified
Pingback: BATTLE FOR THE BEES: Dying Bees Raise Alarm For Humans  Europe Bans Pesticide | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: Think Those Chemicals AND Pesticides In Your Food Have Been Tested? | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: U.S. GMO food labeling drive goes Global  May 25, 2013 | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: Your Body Is A Corporate Test Tube: How You Became a Guinea Pig For the Chemical and BioTech Corporations | Ishtarmuz's Blog
Pingback: The Power Of The Seed and The Global Corporate Monopoly in Seed Patents | Ishtarmuz's Blog
lauren on May 23, 2013 at 5:28 am said:
Is there a list of specific foods that cobtain GMOs? This article was very broad to state processed foods and crops with pesticides.
Reply 
GMO Awareness on May 23, 2013 at 6:16 am said:
Yes Lauren, youll find that under the Avoid section of this blog; heres a direct link. And yes, this *is* very broad, because genetically modified corn comes in a variety of processed formats that is sadly in the majority of our processed foods. I know the first time learning this information can feel incredulous and daunting I felt the same way. Heres a detailed list as compiled by the Non-GMO Project (who is responsible for overseeing non-GMO product certification): http://www.nongmoshoppingguide.com/brands/invisible-gm-ingredients.html
Reply 
Pingback: 10 Things You Need To Know About GMOs - Broke But Bougie
Pingback: Monsantos Dirty Dozen | GMO Awareness
Pingback: Are You Sick of Hearing About Monsanto? | Coupland Times
Pingback: GMO  Yes or No? - F.I.T. 4-Life
Pingback: USDA approves new Non-GMO label for meat, liquid egg products  The EssentiaList
Pingback: The ABCs of GMOs | Ware It's Made From Scratch
Pingback: Monsantos Dirty Dozen 
Pingback: Organic food  What is an organic label really worth? | O LADO ESCURO DA LUA
Pingback: What Is A GMO Anyway? - GoFitMom
Pingback: The World According to Monsanto (FULL LENGTH) The Leader of the Biotech, Chemical, Ag Cartel | MARKETING BYTES Blog & WebsiteMARKETING BYTES Blog & Website
Jefer Bayona on February 7, 2014 at 10:35 pm said:
Thank you so much. I just would like to ask if it safe to assume that eating GM foods will decrease your life span?
Reply 
GMO Awareness on February 12, 2014 at 11:01 am said:
Jefer, no one has done a life-long GMO diet study. All we know is that disease rates have been steadily climbing, and unusually so in the U.S. where a GMO diet is prevalent.
Reply 
Pingback: This Week In Organics: 07th March | This Is Organics
Pingback: GMO Defined | Genetically Modified Murder - Death by Food
Pingback: Nueva investigacin revela el patrn respiratorio de los fumadores | Salud Natural
Pingback: Genetically Modified Organisms - Our Food | Allergies & Your Gut
Pingback: The Dish on Farmers Markets | Beyond the Clothing
Pingback: New study links autism to pesticide exposure  study | Destroy The Order
Pingback: GMO's For Dummies. | Miss GM NO!
Pingback: B4BC / Boarding For Breast Cancer / Be Healthy. Get Active. Ride!  PAUSE 4 PREVENTION // Be GMO Free!
Pingback: Oh Boy  More SOY! | Savor the Home
Pingback: Dont be fooled GMOs are dangerous and deadly! | Alternative Truth
Pingback: is eating local, organic and GMO-free just a trend? | Eat Plants Be Sexy Holistic Health Blog | Brandi Wagner, RHN
Pingback: Be GMO Free! | Chasing Sunshine
Pingback: GMO's - What are they? - One Dog Organic Bakery LLC
Pingback: Beyond Resolved: A Public Forum Debate Manual for Debaters and Coaches | November 2014: Getting into GM Food
Pingback: Produits Monsanto: les 12 pires produits  viter absolument
Pingback: Hawaii's Fight Against GMOs - Maui Goodness|Maui Goodness
maggie neff on October 21, 2014 at 9:40 pm said:
These companies and their shareholders are big campaign contributors.Dont expect anyone in Washington to respond.
Reply 
Pingback: GMO Defined | Educated Eating | Scoop.it
Marni on October 25, 2014 at 12:24 am said:
Im a vegan and very interested to learn more about the process of inserting animal genes into plants. Where can I find some articles on this process?
Reply 
GMO Awareness on October 27, 2014 at 5:23 pm said:
Foreign DNA is inserted into the primary plant species using one of three methods:
1) E.coli bacteria is combined with a soil bacteria that causes tumors that allows the foreign bacteria to breach the host plants cells.
2) Electricity is applied to the host plant to rupture its cell walls, thus allowing the foreign DNA to invade; or
3) A gene gun blasts the engineered DNA directly into the plants cells.
Google process genetic engineering to find documentation from the companies doing the processes.
Reply 
Peppa on October 25, 2014 at 3:05 pm said:
well honestly i believed that GMO foods should be banned because of many reasons. Genetically Modified Organisms are plants or animals created through the gene techniques of biotechnology (also called genetic engineering, or GE). This experimental technology merges DNA from different species, creating unstable combinations of plant, animal, bacterial and viral genes that cannot occur in nature or in traditional crossbreeding. Genetic engineering involves the combination of two unrelated species that. Genes are constantly being injected from one thing to another to create something that people call better.
One reason why i believe that GMO should be banned is because of allergic reactions. Most items that contain GMO have unknown ingredients that are not mentioned. Those ingredients may be include one or more ingredient that someone is allergic to. To be more specific, lets say you are officially allergic to fish and you eat a strawberry. You dont know if that strawberry has a gene of a fish. We dont think about it when we eat it. Its either we like it or not. However,based on the website strawberries cont genes of a fish to protect the fruit from freezing. While you eat the strawberries you think everything thing is fine until you get an allergic reaction. Most people then believe they are allergic to the strawberry but its actually the specific gene that was injected into it that made this a very serious situation. GMO cause deaths and very serious illnesses. Other foods like salmon are genetically engineered with growth hormone which allows them to keep growing larger and larger. Also rice is injected with human genes to produce pharmaceuticals. Also known as a compound manufactured for use as a medicinal drug. Also, goats injected with spider genes to produce milk with stronger proteins.
Another reason why i think Gmo should be banned is because of cross-pollination. Cross-pollination is the transfer of pollen from the anther of a flower of one plant to the stigma of the flower of another plant of the same species. It is also a concern about genetically modified crops.
Reply 
star archer on November 4, 2014 at 9:16 pm said:
Then they sue the farmers whose crops were poisoned by their trash seeds. Why should the farmers have to build a wall, and waste land for a boundry from their sorry product? That is so backwards! We-America look like fools compared with europe and all the other many countries, who have banned the poison crap these companies produce.
Reply 
Desiree Duke on January 23, 2015 at 4:14 pm said:
why do I feel that are seed banks under ground are filled with GM,GMO and alike seeds somebody tell me I am wrong.
Reply 
Pingback: Ingredients: GMOs 101 | Teach Eat Love
Pingback: GMOs: Canola Oil | Teach Eat Love
Pingback: Ingredients  Chipotle Edition  UPDATED | Teach Eat Love
Pingback: Genetically Edited Organisms | Biology Assignment by Mariya
Michael on December 5, 2014 at 8:53 pm said:
I was told that theres a way to visually identify gmo soybean from non-gmo one. non-gmo Hilum is white or yellow and not black. But I cant find any info through Google. Is it true that you can visually identify non-gmo soybean by just looking at its Hilum color?
Thanks for your comment.
Reply 
GMO Awareness on January 7, 2015 at 4:06 pm said:
Hi Michael, some GMO seeds are treated with an (external) color coating. Weve not heard any credible sources claim a difference in Hilum color
Reply 
Cassie on January 27, 2015 at 12:44 pm said:
Thank you! Im doing a research project on GMOs, and this was very helpful!
Reply 
GMO Awareness on March 10, 2015 at 6:27 pm said:
Youre very welcome. Thanks for helping to raise awareness!
Reply 
Pingback: GMOs: Everything You Need To Know  The Clean Eating Chick
Robert on February 2, 2015 at 3:31 am said:
There are some long-term studies done in Russia, Ital, Egypt (or nearby to there) and in a South American country.
The studies were done in the 1990s  2000.
I got to read them while they were available.
Their results were all alike although done independent of each other. The two things that happened was liver and kidney damage with accompanying tumors.
Then in the 3rd generation there was always severe mutation of the offspring and sterility.
They said that 3 generations was all the further the experiments could be taken because of the sterility factor.
These sites became inaccessible several years ago.
It was during the time period when reports were surfacing that scientific studies on long-term GMO effects were finding their research documents burned and lying on their desks when they would arrive for work in the morning.
Shades of The Godfather.
This was also the time when it was reported that grants for long-term research on GMOs were being pulled back and no longer being made available through universities.
Lets not let these incidents fade from memory just because an attempt was made to expunge the evidence of them from existence.
Reply 
Pingback:  Why I Love Just Mayo, A Delicious Non-GMO Mayonnaise
Pingback: GMOs social implication. | hpulido13
Kayla on March 4, 2015 at 8:47 pm said:
I used this site for a research paper and it really helped even things out!!! thanks!!!
Reply 
GMO Awareness on March 10, 2015 at 6:08 pm said:
You are most welcome. Thanks so much for helping to raise awareness!
Reply 
Pingback: What You Should Know About GMOs | HealthyLittleHumans
aworldofheaven on May 18, 2015 at 3:53 pm said:
Please specify your source for such items like fish eggs in tomatoes. Thank you
Reply 
GMO Awareness on May 18, 2015 at 4:26 pm said:
DNAP [DNA Plant Technology of Oakland, California] was the company responsible for genetically engineering a flounder gene into a tomato to increase frost-tolerance. The four year experiment was halted before any products were brought to market. Multiple sources exist online, your search engine will turn these up. Heres a Wiki page that summarizes the story: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetically_modified_tomato
Reply 
Brenda Roberts on May 23, 2015 at 4:50 pm said:
Thank you! Very enlightening!
Reply 
Chandra Mouleeswaran.MK on May 29, 2015 at 11:25 am said:
Chandra Mouleeswaran.MK
selvappriyaa218@gmail.com
29May2K15-Friday
Dear GMO Awarness,
Thank You very much for your great effort in creating awareness among masses on the Genocidal Ill effects of the Satan,Monsanto.
Myself and my assistants and mentors formed Auztra Famauz way back in 1986. This is based on the motto of educating BOTH the consumers and producers on the benefits of traditional organic farming and the ill effects of the HiTech Chemical Farming.
Myself and all of Auztra Famauz congratulate you heartily for your unselfish crusade against the Mostersanto.
We in our hereditary farmlands stubbornly stood against the use of all sorts of chemicals,
for more than three decades, while all others were eagerly and virtually pouring herbicides and insecticides on the soil. These hapless farmers were following the political Monsanto-funded idiots who advocated Green Revolution,  White Revolution and all other colorful revolutions to fool the farmers into more yield and more profit lure. Now, the tide is turning in our favor as we have finally obtained all certification on our truly Virgin soil and ground water.
We consider and believe that the GM and its expansion Genetically Modified are misnomers. Its because, in research, the modifications done can be stopped and at times reversed altogether if found wrong. But the ill-researches conducted by the Monstersanto are actually Mutations that cannot be reversed. It is similar to the aftermath following a Nuclear Blast. The mutations caused by the spewing radiations from the blast are irreversibly permanent. This misnomer itself is a ploy devised by the so called supporters, to confuse the general public into believing that these mutations are just modifications just like those occur in nature.
Even in our India, the well educated and experienced Scientists, falling in line with the political bosses, loudly proclaim that the farmers have been following these modifications in the form of cross breeding and selective breeding and hybridization!
The Monstersanto fed Genetics Mutation Research Scientists are all heartless morons, who, just to materialize their personal greed into reality, can go as long as to test their hypothesis even on their own daughters. They do their best to copy the Creator and rave to wield the magic wand of Creation.
We, irrespective of global location, language, nation or religion, must do unite and resist these Morons.
Thank You very much once again.
Chandra Mouleeswaran.MK
selvappriyaa218@gmail.com
Reply 
Chandra Mouleeswaran.MK on May 29, 2015 at 11:34 am said:
Chandra Mouleeswaran.MK
selvappriyaa218@gmail.com
29May2K15-Friday
Dear GMO Awaerness,
In India too, the Monstersanto very generously decided to waiver the Brand and Research Source Intellectual Royalty (amounting to Millions of USD) on a rare breed Papaya variety research and distribution to farmers. The research was shelved half baked owing to undisclosed reasons. The preludes and forecasts boasted of that rarest of the rare Papaya variety, that it can withstand Ring Rot Virus and ripe after a pretty long storage span
Chandra Mouleeswaran.MK
selvappriyaa218@gmail.com
Reply 
Pingback: The Connection Part One: Agriculture | SurviveinCare
Pingback: GMO Defined | GMO Awareness | Governmental deception
Pingback: The Best Turkey Chili Recipe - Canadian Budget Binder
Belle on August 17, 2015 at 6:12 pm said:
I hope more people will begin speaking up against GMOs. Electrodermal testing reveals that every single person has an intolerance to GMO foods but do not realize. Symptoms are delayed, sometimes 2-3 days and symptoms vary from person to person. Not natural, and independent research shows the harm these foods cause on rats within 3 months  cancer, tumorous growths, organ failure. Damn Monsanto, Dow and all of the other manufacturers of GMOs. In India, every 30 mins a farmer commits suicide due to Monsantos GMO crops, cotton, corn etc. What do I mean? Unforseen quadrupiled expenses of GMO production and the reduction of yield and quality  which is completely opposite to the claims Monsanto makes: higher yield. The country is already third world. Very tragic. Please watch the documentary titled Seeds of Death to learn more about the dangers of GMO foods and why Europe, Britain and Russia have banned GMO foods altogether. I hate North America  the FDA is horrible. U.S. is the worst. Biggest producers of GMOs as well.
Reply 
Pingback: Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO) | WHOKED
Amor on August 29, 2015 at 11:47 am said:
I would like to congratulate you for putting together this website. It has an excellent amount of information on GMOs and raising awareness on the subject.
Reply 
jasmine jaramillo on September 1, 2015 at 12:25 pm said:
thank you for this information but who started it?????
Reply 
GMO Awareness on September 18, 2015 at 3:42 pm said:
Were not sure what youre referring to
Reply 
Pingback: Top 10 Genetically Modified Foods - One Dog Organic Bakery LLC
Pingback: Lets Talk GMOs | R'Oil Living
Chelsey on September 27, 2015 at 9:40 pm said:
If I were to put growth hormones in my fertilizer for my tomatoes, will my tomatoes contain GMOs?
Reply 
GMO Awareness on September 30, 2015 at 9:39 am said:
Hormones are not genetically modified.
Reply 
Pingback: GMOs for Dingbats and Dimwits | Real Food Girl
Maureen Rothwell on October 9, 2015 at 5:52 am said:
I am mortified! This must be stopped (GMO) ! How do those people sleep at night!
Reply 
Pingback: Chapter 5: Why Not the United States? | sandrahabib
Pingback: Do You Actually Know What Youre Talking About When You Say GMO? | Don Freeman
Pingback: Do You Actually Know What Youre Talking About When You Say GMO? | prous1984
Pingback: Categorical: GMO assault on health, environment, and economy - Ascendant Health
Humanist on November 14, 2015 at 8:51 am said:
It is critical that people start to make the connection between inflammatory bowel dseases like Crohns, Colitis and Ulcerative Colitis ad GMOs. Ontario Canada has the highest rates of IBD (particularly pediatric IBD) in world and interestingly enough, these rates began to spike at around 5 years after the introduction of GMO crops. Additionally, anaphylactic shock cases has spike in the past decade. There are anecdotal accounts of people with Crohns disease whose symptoms disappear after they remove GMOs from their diets. The following link has some interesting information regarding this:
http://people.csail.mit.edu/seneff/glyphosate/NancySwanson.pdf
Reply 
Pingback: CONSUMED - a Thriller Movie about GMO Foods - Allergies & Your Gut
Aiden K. Wilkinson on December 3, 2015 at 1:37 am said:
Thanks for informing me on GMOS.Lets fight to get this out of our foods and waters.!:)
Reply 
GMO Awareness on January 8, 2016 at 2:08 pm said:
Youre welcome!
Reply 
Hunter Forsythe on December 7, 2015 at 11:37 am said:
ik right
Reply 
Hunter F on December 7, 2015 at 11:40 am said:
This is very good information.
Reply 
morgan on December 8, 2015 at 6:14 pm said:
They have actually never proven that GMOs cause any sort of health issues. Its all just a guessing game.
Reply 
Pingback: The GMO problem | journalawesomeblog
Pingback: My opinion on Genetically Modified Organisms: You should be worried about the future generation of your food | haley parent
noni shah on January 7, 2016 at 10:12 pm said:
Very interesting information regarding GMO FOOD PRODUCTION. Everyone has to be careful and watch the labels.
The cancer rates are very HIGH in Canada and the government is not doing much.
Reply 
Pingback: My reply to the "Opinion" From December 30, 2015 or "pot Should Stay Illegal In Kentucky" | U.S. Marijuana Party of Kentucky
Pingback: My reply to the "Opinion" From December 30, 2015 or "pot Should Stay Illegal In Kentucky" | U.S. Marijuana Party
Pingback: My reply to the "Opinion" From December 30, 2015 or "pot Should Stay Illegal In Kentucky" | U.S. Marijuana Party  States Issues
Pingback: My reply to the "Opinion" From December 30, 2015 or "pot Should Stay Illegal In Kentucky" | When Government Fails In Kentucky
Pingback: Oh Boy  NO SOY!  Savor the Home
Pingback: 20 Of The Worst GMO Foods And Ingredients To Avoid | Growth Beauty
Christopher Kuckiki on May 13, 2016 at 1:59 pm said:
How is an organism, modified or not, not organic? If it has become inorganic how do we grow it?
Reply 
Pingback: 20 Of The Worst GMO Foods And Ingredients To Avoid ~ Sophlix
Caroline on June 7, 2016 at 2:45 am said:
I must admit that I have been shocked by the knowledge in your research .
I have realized
that its the third world countries that are being affected most by greedy manufacturers and marketers of this deadly crops, but how do we help to make awarness to most farmers knowing very well that most countries in Africa depend economically entirely on agriculture . not forgetting the possibility of having illiterate large scale farmers .
Reply 
caitlin on June 14, 2016 at 9:50 am said:
thank for the answers
Reply 
Pingback: Do you have a leaky gut? - The Health Nut Mama
Pingback: Qu es un OMG u OGM?  Salud es Vida
Pingback: Monsantos Dirty Dozen. Twelve Products that Monsanto has Brought to Market | NO LIES RADIO
Leave a Reply Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. (LogOut/Change)
You are commenting using your Twitter account. (LogOut/Change)
You are commenting using your Facebook account. (LogOut/Change)
You are commenting using your Google+ account. (LogOut/Change)
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email. Notify me of new posts via email.
Subscribe by Email
Enter your email address to receive notifications of news and blog posts by email.
Join 51,149 other followers
We Proudly Support:
Blog at WordPress.com.
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: