A Brief History Of Genetically Modified Organisms: From Prehistoric Breeding To Modern Biotechnology
VitalityUnder the HoodInnovationThe HillThe GrapevineWeird MedicineConditions Search form Search
VitalityHow to Live Better, Longer
6 Must-Have Tips To Awaken Skin All Winter Long Are you ready for the cold dark days that come with Daylight Saving Time? Prepare for winter skin before turning your clock back on Sunday.
To Lose Weight, Skip Dinner A Few Days A Week New research suggests that skipping dinner helps you burn more fat in the evening and may even help with weight loss.
What Is Aspirin  And Should You Take It Daily?
The main ingredient in aspirin, salicin, is the oldest pain reliever in history, but it took time and science before it became the drug we recognize today. Under the HoodBehavior, Neuroscience & Your Brain
Runner's High? You're Growing New Brain Cells Your brain creates new cell growth and repair during aerobic exercises, such as running.
Science Explains Why Songs Get Stuck In Your Head Science explains why you can't get that catchy song out of your head.
Sunshine Actually Makes You Happy In a recent study, people reported more mental distress when the days were shorter and there was less sunshine. InnovationTechnology & the Business of Medicine
These 2 Genes May Predict Your Breast Cancer Survival Rate
Findings from a new study could help more women to overcome breast cancer.
'Mess-Free' Period Sex Is Now A Thing A new product promises to make sex during menstruation less of a mess.
Were Closer Than Ever To Finding Cause Of Autism Researchers discovered hundreds of genes that could be connected with autism spectrum disorder. The HillHealthcare, Policy & Governance
Veterans Have A Problem With Donald Trumps Comment About PTSD Veterans did not respond well to Donald Trump's comments on PTSD, a common mental health disorder many soldiers face.
Countries Should Adopt Sugar Tax, Says World Health Organization The WHO wants countries to start taxing sugary drinks, and use the revenue to fight health problems sugar may worsen.
Where Do Hillary Clinton And Donald Trump Stand On Abortion?
Here's what the presidential candidates have said on the controversial topic of abortion and reproductive rights. The GrapevineBreaking News and Trends
Condom-Free Male Birth Control Shot May Soon Be A Thing A male birth control shot may be on the horizon, and may provide competition for another product being tested  the male pill.
Will Someone Survive A Gunshot Wound? New Tool Could Answer Researchers have developed a new tool that has predicted with 96 percent accuracy whether people would survive a gunshot wound to the brain.
An Easier Way To Screen For Birth Defects May Be In Our Future Wayne State University researchers have developed a test that may be able to screen for birth defects as early as five weeks into pregnancy. Weird MedicineScience is Stranger Than Fiction
Would Eating Human Brains Make You Sick? Have a craving for human brains this Halloween? We don't suggest eating them.
4 Real Medical Illnesses That Were Blamed On Witchcraft Throughout history, people have attributed scary looking and unfamiliar illnesses to dark forces, including witches and demons.
You Wouldn't Expect These 6 Things To Cause Hallucinations People are generally aware of the most common causes of hallucinations, like schizophrenia and a really high fever. But lesser known are the more rare causes; here are six you probably haven't heard about. US / World US / World Consumer News Consumer News Policy / Biz Policy / Biz Science / Tech Science / Tech Drugs Drugs Healthy Living Healthy Living
The GrapevineA Brief History Of Genetically Modified Organisms: From Prehistoric Breeding To Modern Biotechnology Jul 22, 2015 07:00 AM
By
Lecia Bushak Close
Comment Share Tweet Share E-mail The debate over genetically modified organisms (GMOs) can get brutaland often quite confusing, as unbiased research is few and far between. A lot of misleading informationand impassioned arguments from both sidesoftenclouds the conversation around GMOs, too.A GMO is any type of organism, plant, or animal, whose genetic material has been manipulated through genetic engineering. While bacteria, plants, and animals can all be genetically engineered, you're probably mostly familiar with the GMO crops used in agriculture, like corn, soy, alfalfa, and cotton. The debate has largely centered around GMO crops because anything we put into our bodies that might impact our health can be a sensitive topic.GMOs have a very long history. In fact, they've been around for thousands of years. Soperhaps the conflict over their safety and efficacy shouldn't be about whether they're safe for humans to consume, but rather how they will impact long-term, sustainable agricultural efforts.
Soybeans are some of the most commonly produced GMOs, and most are controlled by Monsanto. Photo courtesy of Shutterstock
As Isobel Yeung reports for
Vice: Essentially, farmers have been modifying crops for thousands and thousands of years  weve been cross-breeding our best possible, most productive hybrids to create the best crops, she saidonVice Debrief: Savior Seeds. Theoretically [GMOs are] just the next level of agricultural advancement. Whats different is a new gene is being inserted into a crop which otherwise wouldnt be there.That said, heres how GMOs have been used throughout history.
Even in ancient times, humans were genetically modifying their food without realizing it, molding crops into more desirable versions over time. Wikimedia
Prehistoric Times.
Contrary to popular belief, humans have been messing with food and its genes for a long time, even ifthey originally gave most of the control to nature. Since the advent of agriculture 12,000 years ago, farmers have strived to improve their crops durability, resistance to diseases and pests, and satisfaction to humans as much as possible.Over the years, as humans chose certain qualities over others in plants, they molded crops into what they wanted them to be  bigger, tastier, and juicier. According to Bruce Chasey, executive associate director of the Biotechnology Center at the University of Illinois,we altered these plants so much that they developed into crops that would never survive in the wild without human care. Writing in a 2007
paper, Chasey noted,Plants such as strawberries, wheat, cabbage, corn, and almost all the rest of our crops descended from ancestors that were nothing like strawberries or wheat or corn from back in the day.
Sweet potatoes are actually 8,000 year old GMOs. Photo courtesy of Shutterstock
Take the sweet potato, for example. A recent
studyfound that sweet potatoes were bred some 8,000 years ago out of the swollen parts of regular potato roots. In other words, they didnt exist until humans tinkered with them.1800s.
Gregor Mendel was a scientist and Augustinian friar who lived in what is now the Czech Republic; he's considered the father of modern genetics due to his plant hybridization experiments. Hybridization involves breeding between plants (or animals) of different species  plants are more likely to hybridize because pollen often disperses onto the flowers of other species. He toyed primarily with pea plants between 1856 and 1863, and his work was later drawn upon in genetic engineering.
Working primarily with pea plants, Gregor Mendel became the father of genetics. CC BY 4.0
1954.
Watson and Crick described DNAs shape as a double helix, paving the way for genetic engineering to make a real debut.1970.
Monsanto, a major agriculture company that had its roots in the early 1900s and now controls most of the seed industry, employed chemist John Franz to redevelop glyphosate as an herbicide. The Monsanto glyphosate later came to be known simply as Roundup, which became one of the most commonly used herbicides among farmers, helping to keep pesky weeds at bay. Monsanto then went on to become the biggest supploer ofglyphosate-resistant crops, known as Roundup Ready seeds.
Pesticide and herbicide is sprayed in bulk across rows of soybean crops. Photo courtesy of Shutterstock
1972.
Between 1972 and 1973, U.S. biochemists Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen did the unthinkable: They developed a technique that allowed them to cut pieces of DNA in certain places, and then attach the pieces to the DNA of other organisms, ushering in modern biotechnology. This was also around the time that the first debate over GMO health risks began to emerge. In 1976,biotechnology became commercialized, allowing companies to experiment with inserting genes from one species into another  whether for medicinal, food, or chemical reasons.1982.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that GMOs could be patented, which allowed the Exxon Oil Company to begin using an
oil-eating microorganism. In 1983, Monsanto scientists were some of the first to genetically modify plants, and five years later, they tested their first genetically engineered crops.1988.
Scientists inserted genes into soybeans, ultimately creating what would become the most common GMO: glyphosate-tolerant soybeans. Making a crop that was resistant to herbicide made it much easier, and cheaper, for farmers to control weeds while producing high yields. Soon, other GMO seeds were developed  including potato, cotton, rice, sugar beets, sugarcane, and tomatoes  with the intentionof making these crops resistant to insects, antibiotics, diseases, herbicides, and pesticides.Present Day.
There hasnt been enough research to determine whether GMOs are entirely healthy for humans  although the FDA has listed them as safe.
Some concerns include
the fear that altering the natural state of an organism has unknown consequences for humans, and that genes meant to keep plants resistant to herbicides or antibiotics could potentially harm humans later on. For now, these concerns havent been substantiated.While the debate over whether GMOs are safe for humans and the environment rages on, perhaps its important to remember that GMOs arent necessarily the whole side of the story. And while Monsanto and similar companies thatsell herbicide-resistant GMO seeds along with their namesake brand of herbicidearent exactly leading modern agriculture into a more sustainable era, forcing GMO labels onto food products (or banning GMOs entirely) isnt going to stop them.In a six-month
reporting series
for Grist, Nathaniel Johnson concludedthat embracing or banning GMOs wont make much of a difference. Likewise, Beth Skwarecki ofLifehacker agrees, noting thatbanning or accepting GMOs is just rearranging deck chairs.If were fighting over-industrialization of agriculture, she wrote, GMOs are the wrong battleground.
Comment Share Tweet Share E-mail
Lecia Bushak
Lecia Bushak is a writer and reporter focusing on medical, science, and international news. read more
Join the Discussion
Most Shared1. Alcohol Addiction: This Gene Variant May Curb Binge Drinking2. Smoking Weed May Accelerate Alzheimer's Disease3. Mindfulness Can Make Prisons Better4. Tofu Vs. Meat: Are Vegan Options Really Healthy?5. Are You At Risk For The 'Trump 10'?
VitalityUnder the HoodInnovationThe HillThe GrapevineWeird MedicineConditions
AboutContactAdvertisingPrivacy PolicyTerms Of ServiceSubscribe  2016 IBT Media Inc. All rights reserved.Medical Daily is for informational purposes and should not be considered medical advice, diagnosis or treatment recommendation. Read more.