PCR technology for screening and quantification of genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
| SpringerLink
Skip to main content
Skip to sections
This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org
Search
Home
Contact Us
Log in
Search
Tell us about your experience on SpringerLink and you could win a MacBook Pro. Take survey.
Download PDF
Analytical and Bioanalytical ChemistryApril 2003, Volume 375, Issue8,
pp 985993PCR technology for screening and quantification of genetically modified organisms (GMOs)AuthorsAuthors and affiliationsArneHolst-JensenEmail authorSisselB.RnningAstridLvsethKnutG.BerdalSpecial Issue PaperFirst Online: 15 February 2003Received: 13 September 2002Revised: 03 December 2002Accepted: 06 December 2002DOI:
10.1007/s00216-003-1767-7Cite this article as: Holst-Jensen, A., Rnning, S.B., Lvseth, A. et al. Anal Bioanal Chem (2003) 375: 985. doi:10.1007/s00216-003-1767-7
4
Citations
1
Shares
5k
Downloads
AbstractAlthough PCR technology has obvious limitations, the potentially high degree of sensitivity and specificity explains why it has been the first choice of most analytical laboratories interested in detection of genetically modified (GM) organisms (GMOs) and derived materials. Because the products that laboratories receive for analysis are often processed and refined, the quality and quantity of target analyte (e.g. protein or DNA) frequently challenges the sensitivity of any detection method. Among the currently available methods, PCR methods are generally accepted as the most sensitive and reliable methods for detection of GM-derived material in routine applications.The choice of target sequence motif is the single most important factor controlling the specificity of the PCR method. The target sequence is normally a part of the modified gene construct, for example a promoter, a terminator, a gene, or a junction between two of these elements. However, the elements may originate from wildtype organisms, they may be present in more than one GMO, and their copy number may also vary from one GMO to another. They may even be combined in a similar way in more than one GMO. Thus, the choice of method should fit the purpose. Recent developments include event-specific methods, particularly useful for identification and quantification of GM content. Thresholds for labelling are now in place in many countries including those in the European Union. The success of the labelling schemes is dependent upon the efficiency with which GM-derived material can be detected. We will present an overview of currently available PCR methods for screening and quantification of GM-derived DNA, and discuss their applicability and limitations. In addition, we will discuss some of the major challenges related to determination of the limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ), and to validation of methods.KeywordsEvent-specificValidationDetection and quantification limitReal-time PCRMultiplex PCRReference materialsIntroductionThe polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology is an exploitation of DNA replication, the mechanism responsible for DNA copying in all living cells. Although the principle was first described by Kleppe et al. [1] as replication repair, it was not until the introduction of thermostable DNA polymerases [2] that it became widely applicable. With two primers, each corresponding to one end of the DNA segment to be amplified by PCR, the DNA segment can be amplified exponentially within reasonable time (usually less than 3h to obtain 109copies). Now widely used, the major limitations for PCR-based detection of DNA derived from genetically modified (GM) organisms (GMOs) are access to information about applicable PCR primers and access to DNA suitable for reliable analysis. Although, several PCR primer pairs for GMO analysis have been developed and published within the last 510years, many of these primer pairs have a limited range of application (e.g. primers suitable only for screening). For the majority of GMOs authorised on a worldwide basis there are currently no published primer pairs suitable for reliable identification or quantification. Sequence information describing the genetic modifications is usually kept confidential by biotech companies, and hitherto certified reference materials have been available for only four GMOs [3]. Presently only two of these reference materials are available: Series410S (RoundupReady soybean, and 413 (Mon810 maize) [3]. This of course makes method development and validation difficult. Grinding, heating, acid treatment and other processing rapidly degrades DNA, and refining can lead to efficient removal of DNA. As a consequence, many products contain little GMO-derived DNA, and this DNA is often of low quality. Even with access to suitable primers, a reliable analytical result may therefore not be achievable due to template DNA restrictions. GMO testing may be limited to a simple screening PCR. However, specific identification of the GMO from which DNA is derived, or reliable quantification of the GMO-derived DNA rapidly increases the costs, in particular as the number of GMOs for which to test increases. Development of cost efficient testing schemes and multiplexing of tests have therefore recently been given increasing attention. PCR target sequences: categories and applicationsPCR-based GMO tests can be grouped into at least four categories (Fig.1, Table1) corresponding to their level of specificity. Each category corresponds to the composition of the DNA fragment that is amplified in the PCR. Here it may be helpful to understand the process of transformation (development of a GMO). Note also at this point that a GMO is defined by a unique transformation event. Thus, Mon809 and Mon810 maize are considered as two different GMOs although both belong to the same species (Zea mays) and were transformed with the same plasmid (pV-ZMBK07) [4]. Although transformation could mean deletion or substitution of a part of an organism's genome, transformation usually means insertion of a gene construct into the recipient organism. For simplicity, we will refer only to the latter in the following. The gene construct is composed of several elements, usually at least a gene of interest, a promoter functioning as a start signal, and a terminator functioning as a stop signal for regulation of gene expression (Fig.1). In addition, the construct may be flanked by DNA from the cloning vector. Fig.1. A schematic representation of a typical gene construct and four types of PCR-based assays showing increasing specificity (from top to bottom). H host genomic DNA, P promoter element, E enhancer element, G gene of interest, T = terminator. The gene construct is composed of PT and has been inserted into HTable1. Examples of published methods to
detect GMO derivatives grouped according to categories of specificity (see text
for details)Type of methodTarget sequenceReferenceMethod to detect plant-derived DNAChloroplast tRNALeu
gene (trnL) intron[16]Methods to detect specific speciesCauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV)
genomic DNA[5]Corn/maize hmg, invertase and zein
genes[17,
18, 19]Rape seed Acetyl carboxylase coenzymeA
(AccCoA) gene[20]Soybean lectin gene[21]Tomato polygalacturonase gene[22]Screening methods (category1)Beta lactamase gene (bla)
coding for ampicillin resistance in prokaryotes[18]Cauliflower Mosaic Virus (CaMV)
promoter (P-35S)[23]CaMV terminator (T-35S) [24]Agrobacterium
tumefaciens nopaline synthase terminator (T-Nos)[23]Neomycine-3-phosphotransferaseII (nptII)
coding for neomycin/kanamycin resistance in plants[24]Gene-specific methods (category2)bar
(phosphinotricin acetyltransferase) gene[18]CryIA(b) gene (synthetic)[18,
19]Construct-specific methods (category3,
all junctions)Bt11 maize: IVS6 - CryIA(b) gene[25]Bt176 maize: CDPK promotersynthetic CryIA(b) gene[26]DLL25 maize: Tr7 (complement) 
P-35S[24]GA21 maize: OTPEPSPS gene
(RoundupReady tolerance)[25]Mon802: hsp 70 intron I
CP4-EPSPS gene[24]Mon810 maize: P-35Shsp70
intron I; hsp 70 intronCryIA(b) gene[17,
25]403-2 (RoundupReady)
soybean: P-35SCTP [27]T25 maize: pat
(phospinotricin acetyltransferase) geneT-35S[25]Zeneca tomato: T-Nostruncated tomato polygalacturonase gene[22]Event-specific methods (category4,
all junctions between host plant genome and integrated recombinant DNA)Bt11 maize:[28,
29]Mon 810 maize:[30,
31]CBH-351 (Starlink) maize:[32]RoundupReady soybean:[8,
33, 34]Category1, screening methods The majority of GM plants have been transformed with constructs containing the Cauliflower Mosaic Virus (CaMV) 35S promoter (P-35S) and/or the CaMV 35S (T-35S) or the Agrobacterium tumefaciens nopaline synthase terminator (T-Nos). The most commonly used cloning vectors are pBR322 and its descendants (e.g. pUC19) containing a gene coding for resistance to ampicillin (bla) antibiotics, or vectors containing a gene coding for resistance to neomycin/kanamycin (nptII) antibiotics. Consequently, PCR methods of category1 (Fig.1) targeting the P-35S, T-35S, T-Nos, bla or nptII, have wide applications for screening for genetically modified material [4]. However, these screening methods cannot be used to identify the GMO, since the presence of one of the screening targets does not necessarily imply the presence of GMO-derived DNA. The source of P-35S or T-35S could be naturally occurring CaMV [5], and it is generally believed that Agrobacterium or other soil bacteria containing one or more of the targets are present in soil. It should be noted, though, that the natural prevalence of the targets found in GMOs has not been carefully assessed (K. Nielsen, University of Troms, Norway, 2002, personal communication). An additional source of uncertainty may be presence of cloning vector DNA in the DNA polymerase, for example AmpliTaq (Applied Biosystems) contains amplifiable bla DNA (Fig.2). Fig.2. Evidence for presence of bla DNA in AmpliTaq DNA-polymerase. Left lane positive control pBR322, middle lane no-template control (H2O), right lane size ladder. The length of the amplified product is 104bp. No similar product was obtained with primers designed to yield larger ampliconsCategory2, gene-specific methodsThe gene of interest may also be of a natural origin, but is often slightly modified, for example by truncation or altered codon usage [6]. Furthermore, the choice of available genes is much greater than the choice of available promoters and terminators. Consequently, PCR methods targeting the gene of interest (category2, Fig.1) are more specific than category1 methods. Normally a positive signal with a category2 method implies that GM-derived DNA is present, and in many cases it will even be possible to identify from which GMO the DNA is derived. Category3, construct-specific methodsMethods of category3 target junctions between adjacent elements of the gene construct, for example between the promoter and the gene of interest (Fig.1). With these methods a positive signal will only appear in the presence of GM-derived material, and even more often than with category2 methods will it be possible to identify the GM source of the DNA. However, the full gene construct may have been transformed into more than one GMO, or may be used in future transformations, for example pV-ZMBK07 and pVZMGT10 into the following GM maize: Mon809 (1copy of both), Mon810 (1copy of the former), Mon832 (1copy of the latter) and Mon80100 (unknown number of copies, possibly other related plasmids) [4].Category4, event-specific methodsThe only unique signature of a transformation event (within the limitations of present day technology) is the junction at the integration locus between the recipient genome and the inserted DNA. This junction is the target of category4 (event-specific) methods (Fig.1). Gene stackingUnfortunately, even the event-specific methods have their limitations. When two GMOs are crossed (e.g. two different GM maize such as T25 and Mon810), the resulting hybrid offspring may contain the genetic modifications including the signatures of both events and will be indistinguishable from its two parents in a PCR test (unless the test is performed on DNA from a single plant, tissue or kernel/seed/grain). This phenomenon is referred to as gene stacking. In the USA this type of hybrid GMO is not regulated if both parent GMOs are authorised. In Europe, however, the hybrid is treated as a new GMO and requires separate authorisation. Not only does this create a problem with respect to identification, but it also creates a potential problem for quantitation. If a gene-stacked GM maize is authorised, then 0.6% gene-stacked hybrid shall be treated as a 0.6% GM maize according to EU legislation [7], but PCR tests would report 0.6% GM maizeA+0.6% GM maizeB, that is 1.2% GM maize altogether. Reference targets: species or taxon specificFor quantitation, the copy number of the GM PCR target relative to genome copies of the corresponding species is important because the principle of quantitation of GM content is to compare the relative ratio of these two. Usually, a PCR targeting a species-specific single copy gene is used to determine the amount of the species derived DNA, for example the soybean lectin gene for soya-derived DNA. Thus, in addition to the four categories listed above, we also need PCR methods for the reference targets. In a diploid organism, each cell contains two copies of a single copy gene, while a tetraploid contains four copies per cell. If the GM-specific target is inserted in a single copy, then quantitation becomes relatively simple. In RoundupReady soybean the full-length gene construct is inserted in a single copy, and through backcrossing the diploid GMO has been made homozygous. Thus, in this case each GM cell has a 1:1 ratio of the GM target and the lectin gene. However, if the GM-specific target is inserted in several copies, quantitation becomes more uncertain, in particular if the exact number of inserted copies is unknown. Heterozygosity and ploidy level can introduce additional uncertainty, and testing on single plants, tissues or kernels/seeds/grains may be required to control these parameters. PCR-based quantitationQuantitation must be relative to something. In European legislation [7] it is relative to the ingredient (e.g. maize flour) usually interpreted on a weight basis, but in principle it could also be relative to a specified amount (volume or weight) of a matrix (e.g. beer or bread), or number of units (particles, DNA or protein molecules, etc.). Unfortunately, there is no exact relationship between weight or number of grains and DNA molecules. Yet, it is generally agreed that the best estimates we can obtain with analytical methods build on the assumption that the number of DNA molecules obtained from one weight unit or grain is the same, independent of GM or non-GM origin. Berdal and HolstJensen [8] used a well-characterised food matrix produced with 10% w/w GM soybeans, and yet consistently estimated the GM content to be approximately 12% based on DNA ratios. This could be due to different DNA content per weight unit of the raw materials used for production of the food matrix (GM relative to non-GM soybeans). Because the analytical uncertainty of quantitative PCR methods is generally assumed to be around 25% for the best PCR methods available [9], it has been difficult to estimate the uncertainty introduced by variation between different cultivars, harvests and grains. Competitive PCRThe first quantitative PCR tests were based on competitive PCR [10, 11, 12] (Fig.3, Table2). Quantitation is done by comparison of the amount of end product (end-point quantitation), that is when the PCR reaction is completed. Two target sequences with very similar features and amplifiability are co-amplified in a single reaction tube. Because the two targets compete for available nucleotides, primers and DNA polymerases, the relative quantity of end product is assumed to correspond to the relative quantity at the beginning of the first PCR cycle. Competitive PCR requires development of suitable competitor molecules, and is highly sensitive to the starting concentrations and dilution of template DNAs. It involves massive pipetting of amplified DNA and visualisation by agarose gel electrophoresis, associated with a significant risk of cross contamination. Therefore, it is gradually being replaced with more sophisticated alternatives, in particular real-time PCR.Fig.3. Double competitive PCR. Drawing of agarose gel, with GM-specific amplifications (G1G6) on the left and reference (plant species)-specific amplifications (P1P6) on the right. A molecular size marker (M) is included on either side and between the series. For each of the two targets, a series (e.g. fourfold) of dilutions, and a competitor molecule is made. The competitor should be as similar to the target, and at the same time distinguishable from target, as possible. The same quantity of competitor (e.g. 250copies) is added to each dilution. Because competitor and target will compete for reagents, the initial copy number ratio is approximately maintained at the end point of the reaction. When the copy numbers of competitor and target are the same, both will yield the same quantity of amplification product, visible as bands of equal intensity (equilibrium). The points of equilibrium (GE and PE) for the series are visualised by white boxes. GE=(G3+G4)/2, while PE=P3. Usually, the Pseries will have to be diluted (e.g. 10-fold) relative to the Gseries, because the GMO content is much lower than 100%. The GM content can be calculated using the formula GE/PE multiplied by 100%. The present example corresponds to a GM content of 5%Table2. Examples of published methods to quantify GMO
derivatives grouped into competitive and real-time PCR methodsType of methodTarget GMOReferenceDouble competitive PCR methodsRoundupReady soybean (raw materials)[12]Bt176 maize (raw materials)[12]P-35S (screening)[11]T-Nos (screening)[11]Epsps gene (RoundupReady)[10]Synthetic CryIA(b) gene[10]Bt11 maize (event specific)[28]Real-time PCR methodsRoundupReady soybean (event specific)[8,
33, 34]Mon810 maize (event specific)[30,
31]Bt11 maize (event specific)[29]CBH-351 (Starlink) maize (event
specific)[32]Synthetic CryIA(b) gene[19]Real-time PCRReal-time PCR allows for monitoring of the amplification reaction during amplification (in real-time) in a closed environment without interfering with the reaction (cf. Fig.4 and Table2). Fluorescence signal corresponding to increased amount of amplification product can be measured and visualised on a computer screen. Software can immediately convert the signal into quantitative estimates. This speeds up quantitation, and the risk of cross contamination is low. With the fastest available alternative quantitative results can be made available within approximately 30min from the beginning of the first PCR cycle. In comparison, competitive PCR would require at least 3h, usually more. Quantitation can either be done by direct comparison of the Ct-values of the two (Ct-method) or by comparison with a standard curve. The advantage of standard curve quantitation is that Ct-values are compared only with Ct-values of the same amplicon. So with standard curve quantitation, the final quantitative estimate is based on comparing estimated quantity of GM to estimated quantity of reference. The estimate is therefore the ratio of quantity to quantity, not of PCR cycle to PCR cycle. Real-time PCR requires very expensive laboratory equipment, and therefore cheaper alternatives giving similar accuracy and comparable throughput are welcomed.Fig.4. Real-time PCR. Each amplification reaction is shown as a separate coloured graph. The fluorescence released in response to synthesis of the target amplicon is measured in real-time. The increase in amplification products in the initial PCR cycles is too small to be detectable (dotted lines), but as the reaction proceeds it enters a phase where the increase can be visualised as a linear increase in signal (the log linear phase, shown as solid lines). When the signal corresponds to a threshold level (the baseline, green horizontal line), the corresponding cycle number for the reaction is scored (Ct-value). Quantitation can be done using a direct comparison of Ct-values (Ct method), or by comparison of copy numbers derived from a standard curve (standard curve method). For an unknown sample two reactions of the same concentration of the template DNA must be performed, one targeting a reference (R), and one targeting a GM-specific (G) sequence. The two reactions representing unknown sample shown in the figure are the black stippled graphs. The difference in Ct (Ct) for the two targets (Ct=CtGCtR) can be used directly to estimate the GM content using the formula \({1 \over {2^{\Delta Ct} }} \times 100\%
= {\rm GM}\% \)However, the use of  Ct for quantitation is only valid if the two targets are amplified with the same efficiency. The use of the standard curve method is not limited by such a requirement. With this method, a standard curve based on amplification of a series of reactions with known initial target copy number is established for each of the two targets. A regression line (the standard curve) relates initial target copy number to Ct-value, consequently allowing for conversion of the Ct-values of the unknown sample to initial target copy numbers. For simplicity, only one standard curve is shown in the figure, meant to represent the standard curves of both R and G. The GM content can be estimated by comparison of the initial target copy numbers of the two targets, using the formula \({{N_G } \over {N_R }} \times 100\%
= {\rm GM}\% \) In the example shown, Ct=30.023.3=6.7, corresponding to approximately 1% GM. The same result is observed with the standard curve method, since NG=102 and NR=104Multiplex quantitationAlternatives to competitive PCR, yet building on end-point quantitation, include at least two ways of analysing populations of PCR reaction products from multiplex PCR developed within the European shared cost action Qpcrgmofood. Rudi and Holck [13] have developed a method where short oligonucleotide probes are labelled immediately after the PCR reaction, and where there is a linear relationship between the quantity of labelled probe and the quantity of the corresponding amplification product. The reactions are successively analysed by array hybridisation of the probes, and the identity of positives and quantitation is done by image analysis. GarciaCaas et al. [14] recently published a qualitative assay for duplex analysis and identification of the PCR reaction products from GMOs by capillary gel electrophoresis. Burns et al. [15] have recently developed a similar assay which is quantitative and includes three reaction products. Detection and quantification limitsThe limits of detection (LOD) and quantitation (LOQ) are defined as the lowest quantities that can be reliably detected and quantified, respectively. This may sound straightforward, but certainly is not. No subject, maybe apart from discussion on how to obtain suitable biological materials, has gained comparable attention or created more intense debate among experts on GMO analysis. Berdal and HolstJensen [8] proposed to use absolute copy numbers of the target amplicons as the basis for establishing the LOD and LOQ, and to distinguish between the LOD/LOQ of the method (usually determined through a validation study as a relative value, e.g. 0.1%) and the practical LOD/LOQ (which can only be determined from results of analyses of the test sample). Purchasers of GMO tests are not a homogeneous group. Yet, they all expect the test reports to provide information about the analytical sample. Despite this fact, most certificates from test laboratories report the LOD and LOQ of the method, referring to relative percentage values from the method validation where DNA of high quality from a pure single taxon matrix is used. This situation is quite different from the situation with many analytical samples of commercial products. Such samples are often processed, may contain mixtures of (DNA from) several taxa, and the amount of high-quality DNA available in a PCR may be much lower than what is required if the reported (method specific) LOD and LOQ should be applicable. This is well known by the test laboratories, but because this knowledge requires insight in the technicalities of the analytical methods, it is less well known by competent authorities and companies purchasing the GMO tests. The practice clearly leads to misinterpretation, and could even be characterised as fraud, although a number of other factors to some extent may justify the practice. If the customer is unable to interpret a more correct test report referring to practical (sample specific) LOD/LOQ values, misinterpretation could still be the consequence, and stating that the LOD and LOQ are near or above the threshold for labelling might scare the customer from purchasing more tests from the test laboratory. The best solution to this challenge in our opinion would be a two-phased approach in which one 1) actively communicates to the competent authorities and other purchasers of GMO tests that there is a need for incorporation of test-specific LOD/LOQ values in test reports and legislation, and 2) tries to provide simple and interpretable expressions of the LOD/LOQ values in the test reports. Although this is a challenge, it is not an impossible thing to do. Determination of the practical LOD/LOQ must be DNA copy number based, but the values can be converted and expressed as relative percentages which we believe are easier to interpret relative to legislation. The LOD is the lowest concentration of the analyte at which the presence of the analyte will be detected with more than 95% probability. The LOD may therefore be determined by setting up a series of concentrations of the analyte and performing a statistically sufficient number of replicate analyses. This principle does not specify whether the analyte concentration is in DNA molecule copy numbers or relative percentages of DNA molecules. This freedom allows an LOD of five GM-DNA copies to be expressed very differently. Such an LOD may be applicable for a wide range of sample types. If it is expressed as LOD=0.0001% (such a value may be reached under highly optimised conditions with five GM-DNA copies in a background of 5106haploid reference genomes of the corresponding species), then the expressed LOD would not be applicable with more complex or processed sample types (e.g. with 500reference genomes mixed with a majority of DNA from other taxa). If, on the other hand, it is expressed as LOD=5copies, then the LOD is not easily interpreted by non-experts. Furthermore, such a way of expressing the LOD is not harmonised with the legislation [7].If the genome size of the target taxon (e.g. soybean) is known and the DNA content in a pure DNA sample can be precisely determined, then a sample containing any relative percentage can be mixed by combining DNA from a non-GM plant specimen and a GM plant specimen, and the absolute copy numbers of the target taxon and GMO-specific sequences can be estimated reliably in these samples. Estimates of genome sizes are available [35], and quantitative methods frequently refer to these estimates. The estimates are sometimes given as ranges, in which case an analytical uncertainty is introduced if genome size is a parameter in the quantitation equation. Yet, genome sizes may prove very useful. Methods to determine the DNA content in a sample may yield considerable variation. One method that has been demonstrated to yield a high degree of correspondence between the estimated DNA content and PCR tests is based on SYBR Green fluorescence measurements [8]. No estimates of the measurement uncertainty of this method are currently available, but we find it reasonable to assume that it can be compared with the relative uncertainty introduced by mixing GM and non-GM materials in the preparation of CRMs on the basis of weight ratio. This would imply that in principle samples containing any concentration in absolute copy numbers or relative percentages of GMO relative to the target taxon can be prepared by mixing of DNA from a single GM specimen and a single non-GM specimen. The advantage of this should be obvious. It would allow determination of the full dynamic range of the method, it would allow a more precise determination of the LOD/LOQ of the method in absolute copy numbers, and it would allow the DNA-based method to be validated on the basis of DNA molecule ratios rather than on weight ratios. The latter would harmonise better with the basis for GM quantification with PCR.For the purpose of preparing samples as described above, DNA extracted from for example leaves of a single plant individual would be perfect. Such material can be obtained from a plant growing out of a single seed for example from a contaminated feed lot. Such seeds are not covered by patent protection, and thus property rights should not limit the access to biological material. Before the actual LOD and LOQ of a test can be estimated, it is important to take into consideration a few additional factors. The first factor is sampling. A single tomato is either GM or non-GM, while a corn cob may be composed of GM and non-GM kernels if the maternal DNA (the plant on which the cob is produced) is non-GM and some of the paternal DNA (from pollen) is GM. The number of units that can be GM must therefore be taken into consideration. In a sample of 10,000tomatoes or maize kernels, a single GM tomato or kernel corresponds to 0.01%. Thus, the LOD cannot be less than 0.01% even if the tomatoes or kernels are converted to a pulp of billions of particles. If DNA is extracted from 106particles then a single GM particle would correspond to 0.0001%. Thus, even if a single particle may contain many more haploid reference genomes, the LOD cannot be less than 0.0001%.The next aspect to consider is statistics, related to the distribution of units in a volume. This is often assumed to follow a Poisson distribution, giving a cumulative probability of drawing positives. However, distribution may be heterogeneous and aggregated. Thus, it is necessary to determine whether distribution is homogeneous and random throughout the analytical procedure, starting with sampling and terminating with the PCR. Estimating the LOD and LOQ for the PCR analysis alone is probably the simplest part of estimating the true LOD/LOQ of the final test, because we have good reason to assume that DNA is Poisson distributed in a liquid solution. The minimum copy number that can be detected is one. Thus, the theoretical absolute LOD (absLOD)1single copy. A Poisson distribution gives us a 95% probability of including at least one copy if the nominal number is 5copies in the PCR [8, 36]. Thus, the real absLOD5copies for any target DNA in a single PCR. The relative LOD (relLOD in %) is determined by the ratio of the GM-specific absLOD (absLODGM) to observed haploid reference genomes in the PCR (REFOBSPCR). If the number of haploid reference genomes is maximized (REFMAXPCR), such as would typically be the case in a validation study, then the method-specific relLOD (relLODMETHOD) is determined: $${}^{{\rm rel}}{\rm LOD}_{{\rm METHOD}}
= {{{}^{{\rm abs}}{\rm LOD}_{{\rm GM}} } \over {{}^{{\rm REF}}{\rm MAX}_{{\rm PCR}} }} \times 100\% $$If the number of haploid reference genomes is the result of a specific observation for the unknown that is being tested, then the practical LOD of the sample (relLODSAMPLE) is determined: $${}^{{\rm rel}}{\rm LOD}_{{\rm SAMPLE}}
= {{{}^{{\rm abs}}{\rm LOD}_{{\rm GM}} } \over {{}^{{\rm REF}}{\rm OBS}_{{\rm PCR}} }} \times 100\% $$Similar calculations can be performed for LOQ, which normally is between 510times the LOD. Increasing the number of replicates can improve the relLOD and relLOQ, but only because it means an increase in REFOBSPCR. The true LOD/LOQ of the test is always the cumulative LOD/LOQ of all the analytical steps, and the most important limiting factor is the analytical step that yields the worst LOD/LOQ. A direct observation from the relationships outlined above is that the relLOQSAMPLE is >100% if the REFOBSPCR is less than the absLOQGM. This is indeed sometimes the case with highly processed materials. Method development in the Qpcrgmofood projectWithin the project "Reliable, Standardised, Specific, Quantitative Detection of Genetically Modified Food" funded by the European Commission under the Fifth Framework program (Qpcrgmofood; contract no.QLK1-1999-01301) a number of real-time quantitative PCR methods have been developed and published [8, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34] and several additional papers presenting new methods are in preparation. The project was partially initiated through discussions in a working group of the European Committee for Normalisation (CEN), where the need for development of new and more reliable methods was identified. One of the objectives of the project is to provide validated methods to CEN. The project is composed of 6workpackages; DNA extraction, reference genes, characterisation of event-specific sequence motifs, detection and quantitation method development, method validation, and socio-economic studies in relation to traceability and GM detection methods. DNA extraction is important because the most limiting factor with respect to the LOD/LOQ of the PCR test is the quality and quantity of template DNA. Reference genes play a very important role in the context of quantitation. Yet, the Qpcrgmofood project is the first project where the copy number and allelic stability of the reference gene-specific PCR targets are assessed across a wide range of available cultivars of the corresponding taxon and against non-target taxa. This has made it possible to distinguish between reliable and unreliable reference genes and primers, and to develop primers for new genes and taxa. The first paper presenting these results has already been published [20] and additional papers are in preparation. Several of these genes are presently in the process of being validated in collaborative trials and will successively be proposed as standards for CEN/ISO. Characterisation of event-specific sequence motifs is required to obtain sequence information for development of event-specific methods. In addition this also provides better insight into the actual process of transformation and can be used to verify and update the genetic maps of GMOs (e.g. [37]).Validation of PCR methodsValidation of GMO detection and quantitation methods is not straightforward, because of problems connected to availability, type and quality of reference materials, principles of quantitation, expression of the LOD and LOQ, and applicability of LOD and LOQ on different types of samples. There are essentially three critical components in a validation study: the method, the test material, and the performance of the participants. Prior to validation in a collaborative trial the method must be optimised and prevalidated. This may include publication in a peer-reviewed journal, allowing other scientists and laboratories to evaluate and criticise the method. More important, however, may be the organisation of a prevalidation trial among a small number of independent laboratories, similar to a full-scale collaborative trial. The objective of the prevalidation study should be to confirm that the method is suitable for the full-scale collaborative trial, including determination of the among- and within-laboratory variation. In the Qpcrgmofood project, such trials are performed for every method, and to select among alternative methods where more than one alternative exists for the same purpose.The test material must be referable to a standardised commodity. For GMOs, analytical methods are usually validated with CRMs. However, CRMs are presently only available for two GMOs, and their suitability for validation of real-time quantitative PCR methods may be questioned. First of all, the PCR methods can only be used to quantify the GMO content on the basis of genome equivalents (relative ratios of DNA molecules), while the CRMs are produced on the basis of weight equivalents. Since the number of DNA molecules in one unit of GM may differ from that of non-GM, a significant error may be introduced at this point. Secondly, to assure that the CRMs are sufficiently homogeneous the material used in the production of CRMs is ground to minimise the particle size variation [38], but a consequence is that much of the DNA is degraded [29]. Thirdly, the CRMs are only available in low relative percentage concentrations (05%), but the dynamic range of a method may include the 100% level. Fourthly, CRMs are pure, single-ingredient matrices. Validation based solely on CRMs may therefore give the wrong impression of the LOD and in particular the LOQ, for example if the absLOQGM varies with the total amount of template DNA in the PCR. In a recent study [29] such alteration was demonstrated for an event-specific real-time quantitative method targeting Bt11 maize by addition of soybean DNA. Similar results have been observed in our laboratory with an event-specific method targeting RoundupReady soybean (RRS) [8, unpublished data]. In the preparation of validation studies within the Qpcrgmofood-project, we have been confronted with a few particularly difficult questions concerning the selection of suitable test materials, and the expression of LOD and LOQ in relative percentages versus DNA copy numbers. In the project, event-specific methods are developed on the basis of sequence data obtained from characterisation of biological materials that may or may not be of certified origin, depending on the GMO. Sequences obtained from for example contaminated seed or feed samples, may be questioned, even if a sequence contig is obtained that matches perfectly with the description of the GMO in public databases, for example Agbios [4]. As a consequence, the methods developed on the basis of sequence data may or may not be questioned, depending on the source of the sequence data. One solution that we have considered within the Qpcrgmofood project is to submit the sequence data and method to the company producing the GMO, accompanied by a request for biological material and/or verification of the sequence data. However, this will require collaboration by companies that hitherto have been restrictive in their distribution of materials and sequence data, and could lead to restrictions or delays in publication. Another solution could be to validate the method with the available material or cloned DNA fragments [33], stating the limitation of the validity of the results associated with the degree of uncertainty regarding the origin of the material. Whether it is acceptable from the standpoint of CEN or other standardising bodies is an important question. The conclusions at this point may have a strong impact on the number of GMOs for which methods can be made available and validated. Even if the sequence data are not questioned, the suitability of the test materials for testing the specificity may be questioned if they are derived from another source than the sequence data, for example if the sequence data is from a CRM, while the test material is produced from dried leaf material of a single plant specimen. We would argue that the specificity of the method is assured by design of the method to detect and quantify the event-specific integration junction using a highly specific hybridisation probe, for example a TaqMan probe. Consequently, we do not find such criticism against the use of non-certified material in a validation study justified, if the sequence data is not questioned. Final conclusionsThe major challenges in the field of PCR-based GM detection methods are the accessibility of GM-derived material, the DNA extraction methods, efficient cost reductions and multiplexing, and implementation of sample-specific expressions of the LOD and LOQ. Method availability and validation is heavily influenced by these challenges, as well as by available resources invested. The major achievements made within the last couple of years, in particular in the context of the Qpcrgmofood project include identification of reliable species-specific reference genes for particularly important crop plants, characterisation of transformation events, development of event-specific quantitative methods for several GMOs, as well as of multiplex methods, better understanding and expression of the LOD and LOQ in PCR tests for GMOs, and improved strategies for validation of GMO detection methods. AcknowledgementsThis study was financially supported by the European Commissions Framework5, Quality of Life program, within the project "Reliable, Standardised, Specific, Quantitative Detection of Genetically Modified Food" (QLK1199901301), and a grant from the Research Council of Norway (NFR136430/130).References1.Kleppe K, Ohtsuka E, Kleppe R, Molineux I, Khorana HG (1971) J Mol Biol 56:341361PubMedGoogle Scholar2.Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S, Scharf SJ, Higuchi R, Horn GT, Mullis KB, Erlich HA (1988) Science 239:487491PubMedGoogle Scholar3.Institute of Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM), European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Geel, Belgium (2002) http://www.irmm.jrc.be/. Cited 12 Sept 20024.Agriculture and Biotechnology Strategies Canada inc (2002) GMO database. http://www.agbios.com. Cited 12 Sept 20025.Wolf C, Scherzinger M, Wurz A, Pauli U, Hbner P, Lthy J (2000) Eur Food Res Technol 210:367372Google Scholar6.Hemmer W (1997) BATS-report 2/97. BATS, Basel, Switzerland7.Commission Regulation 49/2000 EC (2000) Off J Europ Com-11.1.2000-No L 6, P. 001300148.Berdal KG, Holst-Jensen A (2001) Eur Food Res Technol 213:432438Google Scholar9.European Committee for Normalisation (CEN), Technical Committee 275, Working group 11, internal working documents10.Studer E, Rhyner C, Lthy J, Hbner P (1998) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 207:207213CrossRefGoogle Scholar11.Hardegger M, Brodmann P, Herrmann A (1999) Eur Food Res Technol 209:8387CrossRefGoogle Scholar12.Van den Eede G, Lipp M, Eyquem F, Anklam E (2000) European Commission, Joint Research Centre, IHCP. EUR 19676 EN13.Rudi K, Holck A, Matforsk, Norway, personal communication14.Garca-Caas V, Gonzles R, Cifuentes A (2002) J Agric Food Chem 50:10161021CrossRefPubMedGoogle Scholar15.Burns M, Shanahan D, Valdivia H, Harris N (2003) Eur Food Res Technol (in press)16.Taberlet P, Gielly L, Pautou G, Bouvet J (1991) Plant Mol Biol 17:11051109PubMedGoogle Scholar17.Zimmermann A, Liniger M, Lthy J, Pauli U (1998) Lebensm-Wiss u Technol 31:66466718.Ehlers B, Strauch E, Goltz M, Kubsch D, Wagner H, Maidhof H, Bendiek J, Appel B, Buhk H-J (1997) Bundesgesundhbl 4:118121Google Scholar19.Vatilingom M, Pijnenburg H, Gendre F, Brignon P (1999) J Agric Food Chem 47:52615266PubMedGoogle Scholar20.Hernandez M, Rio A, Esteve T, Prat S, Pla M. (2001) J Agric Food Chem 49:36223627CrossRefPubMedGoogle Scholar21.Meyer R, Chardonnens F, Hbner P, Lthy J (1996) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 203:339344PubMedGoogle Scholar22.Busch U, Mhlbauer B, Schulze M, Zagon J (1999) Deutsche Lebensmittelrundschau Heft 2:5256Google Scholar23.Pietsch K, Waiblinger H-U, Brodmann P, Wurz A (1997) Deutsche Lebensm Rundsch 93:3538Google Scholar24.Matsuoka T, Kuribara H, Takubo K, Akiyama H, Miura H, Goda Y, Kusakabe Y, Isshiki K, Toyoda M, Hino A (2002) J Agric Food Chem 50:21002109CrossRefPubMedGoogle Scholar25.Matsuoka T, Kuribara H, Akiyama H, Miura H, Goda Y, Kusakabe Y, Isshiki K, Toyoda M, Hino A (2001) J Food Hyg Soc Japan 42:2432Google Scholar26.Hupfer C, Hotzel H, Sachse K, Engel K-H (1998) Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 206:203207CrossRefGoogle Scholar27.Wurz A, Willmund (1997) Foods produced by means of genetic engineering. In: Schrieber, GA, Bgl KW (eds) 2nd status report. BgVV-Heft 1/1997, pp11511728.Zimmermann A, Lthy J, Pauli U (2000) Lebensm-Wiss u Technol 33:21021629.Rnning SB, Vatilingom M, Berdal KG, Holst-Jensen A (2003) Eur Food Res Technol (in press)30.Holck A, Vatilingom M, Didierjean L, Rudi K (2002) Eur Food Res Technol 214:449454Google Scholar31.Hernandez M, Pla M, Esteve T, Prat S, Puigdomenech P, Ferrando A (2002) Transgenic Res (in press)32.Windels P, Bertrand S, Depicker A, Moens W, Van Bockstaele E, De Loose M (2003) Eur Food Res Technol (in press)33.Taverniers I, Wiendels P, Van Bockstaele E, De Loose M (2001) Eur Food Res Technol 213:417424Google Scholar34.Terry C, Harris N (2001) Eur Food Res Technol 213:425431Google Scholar35.Arumuganathan K, Earle ED (1991) Plant Mol Biol Rep 9:211215Google Scholar36.Kay S, Van den Eede G (2001) Nature Biotechnol 19:405Google Scholar37.Windels P, Taverniers I, Depicker A, Van Bockstaele E, De Loose M (2001) Eur Food Res Technol 213:107112CrossRefGoogle Scholar38.Prokisch J, Zeleny R, Trapmann S, Le Guern L, Schimmel H, Kramer GN, Pauwels J (2001) Fresen J Anal Chem 370:935939CrossRefGoogle ScholarCopyright informationSpringer-Verlag2003Authors and AffiliationsArneHolst-Jensen1Email authorSisselB.Rnning1AstridLvseth1KnutG.Berdal11.National Veterinary InstituteOsloNorway
About this article
Print ISSN
1618-2642
Online ISSN
1618-2650
Publisher Name
Springer-Verlag
About this journal
Reprints and Permissions
Co-published with
Published in partnership with eight prestigious societies
Article actions
Export citation
.RIS
Papers
Reference Manager
RefWorks
Zotero
.ENW
EndNote
.BIB
BibTeX
JabRef
Mendeley
Share article
Email
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Shareable link
Article contents
Article
Abstract
Introduction
PCR target sequences: categories and applications
Reference targets: species or taxon specific
PCR-based quantitation
Detection and quantification limits
Method development in the Qpcrgmofood project
Validation of PCR methods
Final conclusions
Acknowledgements
References
Copyright information
Authors and Affiliations
About this article
Cookies
We use cookies to improve your experience with our site.
More information
Accept
Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips
Switch Edition
Academic Edition
Corporate Edition
Home
Impressum
Legal Information
Contact Us
 2016 Springer International Publishing AG. Part of Springer Nature.
Not logged in
GWLA (3000123364) - Arizona State University Library Continuations (8200710465)
209.147.144.54