Dominican Scholar - Scholarly and Creative Works Conference: Genetically Modified Organisms
Skip to main content
Dominican Scholar
HomeAboutFAQMy Account
< Previous Event
Next Event >
Home
> EVENTS
> SCW
> SCW2015
> POSTERS
> 49
Poster Presentations - Guzman Lecture Hall
Presentation Title
Genetically Modified Organisms
Presenter Information
Rebecka Mae Apolinario, Dominican University of CaliforniaFollow
Location
Guzman 306
Start Date
24-4-2015 10:20 AM
End Date
24-4-2015 10:35 AM
Department
Health Sciences
Faculty Mentor
Dr.Martha Nelson
Presentation Format
Oral Presentation
Abstract/Description
According to the American Heritage Medical Dictionary, a Genetically Modified Organism or GMO is  An organism whose genetic characteristics have been altered by the insertion of modified gene or a gene from another organism using the techniques of genetic engineering. GMOs have been in the populations food supply for almost twenty years, and despite being around for decades, the general public is unknowledgeable about what benefits or advantages the technology used to create GMOs offers and what are the potential risk they may have. Experts say that about 60 to 70 percent of the processed foods in the U.S. grocery store have some type of genetically modified ingredient (Genetic Science Learning Center ,2014). While the technology used to create GMOs, the consumption of GMOs and the labeling procedures of the products are controversial topics, the citizens should be educated about the aversive effects creating and consuming modified food has on not only the human body but the environment as well. By educating themselves and reading labels, the citizens can then make a choice between consuming and purchasing GMOs or non-GMOs.
Education is an important factor in whether or not citizens decide to purchase GMO or not. A structured podcast would help inform the public on the possible benefits or aversive affects that consuming these modified foods could have. In order to fully educate the listeners of the 15 minute podcast, information about the importance of biodiversity, ethical issues, benefits and risks to the human body and environment must be included within the podcast. Also regulation and labeling laws in which food manufacturing companies must abide by will be included. By chosing to do a podcast, the audience would have better access to the information and relate to the topic on a more personal level. A peer group and Dominican Communication faculty will help refine and review the message that the podcast is trying to convey to the audience.
This document is currently not available here.
Share
COinS
Apr 24th, 10:20 AM
Apr 24th, 10:35 AM
Genetically Modified Organisms
Guzman 306
According to the American Heritage Medical Dictionary, a Genetically Modified Organism or GMO is  An organism whose genetic characteristics have been altered by the insertion of modified gene or a gene from another organism using the techniques of genetic engineering. GMOs have been in the populations food supply for almost twenty years, and despite being around for decades, the general public is unknowledgeable about what benefits or advantages the technology used to create GMOs offers and what are the potential risk they may have. Experts say that about 60 to 70 percent of the processed foods in the U.S. grocery store have some type of genetically modified ingredient (Genetic Science Learning Center ,2014). While the technology used to create GMOs, the consumption of GMOs and the labeling procedures of the products are controversial topics, the citizens should be educated about the aversive effects creating and consuming modified food has on not only the human body but the environment as well. By educating themselves and reading labels, the citizens can then make a choice between consuming and purchasing GMOs or non-GMOs.
Education is an important factor in whether or not citizens decide to purchase GMO or not. A structured podcast would help inform the public on the possible benefits or aversive affects that consuming these modified foods could have. In order to fully educate the listeners of the 15 minute podcast, information about the importance of biodiversity, ethical issues, benefits and risks to the human body and environment must be included within the podcast. Also regulation and labeling laws in which food manufacturing companies must abide by will be included. By chosing to do a podcast, the audience would have better access to the information and relate to the topic on a more personal level. A peer group and Dominican Communication faculty will help refine and review the message that the podcast is trying to convey to the audience.
Search
Enter search terms:
Select context to search:
in this collection
in this repository
across all repositories
Advanced Search
Notify me via email or RSS
Browse
Collections
Disciplines
Disciplines
Authors
Years
Conferences
Author Corner
Author FAQ
Submit Description/Presentation
LINKS
Dominican University of California
Archbishop Alemany Library
This collection is part of theDigital Commons Network
Architecture 
Arts and Humanities 
Business 
Education 
Engineering 
Law 
Life Sciences
Medicine and Health Sciences 
Physical Sciences and Mathematics 
Social and Behavioral Sciences
Digital Commons
Home
|
About
|
FAQ
|
My Account
|
Accessibility Statement