Distortion of Genetically Modified Organism Quantification in Processed Foods: Influence of Particle Size Compositions and Heat-Induced DNA Degradation - Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry (ACS Publications)
ADVERTISEMENT
Log In
Register
Cart
ACS
ACS Publications
C&EN
CAS
ACS Journals
ACS ChemWorx
eBooks
ACS Style Guide
C&EN Archives
A
Accounts of Chemical Research
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering
ACS Catalysis
ACS Central Science
ACS Chemical Biology
ACS Chemical Neuroscience
ACS Combinatorial Science
- Journal of Combinatorial Chemistry
ACS Earth and Space Chemistry - New in 2017
ACS Energy Letters - New in 2016
ACS Infectious Diseases
ACS Macro Letters
ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters
ACS Nano
ACS Omega - New in 2016
ACS Photonics
ACS Sensors - New in 2016
ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering
ACS Synthetic Biology
Analytical Chemistry
- I&EC Analytical Edition
B
Biochemistry
Bioconjugate Chemistry
Biomacromolecules
Biotechnology Progress
C
Chemical Research in Toxicology
Chemical Reviews
Chemistry of Materials
Crystal Growth & Design
E
Energy & Fuels
Environmental Science & Technology
Environmental Science & Technology Letters
I
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
- Journal of Industrial & Engineering Chemistry
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
- I&EC Process Design and Development
- I&EC Fundamentals
- Product Research & Development
- Product R&D
- I&EC Product Research and Development
Inorganic Chemistry
J
Journal of the American Chemical Society
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry
Journal of Chemical & Engineering Data
- I&EC Chemical & Engineering Data Series
Journal of Chemical Education
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling
- Journal of Chemical Documentation
- Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry
Journal of Natural Products
The Journal of Organic Chemistry
J (continued)
The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
The Journal of Physical Chemistry B
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C
- The Journal of Physical Chemistry
- The Journal of Physical and Colloid Chemistry
The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters
Journal of Proteome Research
L
Langmuir
M
Macromolecules
Molecular Pharmaceutics
N
Nano Letters
O
Organic Letters
Organic Process Research & Development
Organometallics
Advanced Search
Search
Citation
Subject
Search in:
Anywhere
Title
Author
Abstract
J. Agric. Food Chem.
All Publications/Website
Select a Journal or Book
Acc. Chem. Res.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng.
ACS Catal.
ACS Cent. Sci.
ACS Chem. Biol.
ACS Chem. Neurosci.
ACS Comb. Sci.
ACS Earth Space Chem.
ACS Energy Lett.
ACS Infect. Dis.
ACS Macro Lett.
ACS Med. Chem. Lett.
ACS Nano
ACS Omega
ACS Photonics
ACS Sens.
ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng.
ACS Symposium Series
ACS Synth. Biol.
Advances in Chemistry
Anal. Chem.
Biochemistry
Bioconjugate Chem.
Biomacromolecules
Biotechnol. Prog.
Chem. Res. Toxicol.
Chem. Rev.
Chem. Mater.
Crystal Growth & Design
Energy Fuels
Environ. Sci. Technol.
Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett.
Ind. Eng. Chem.
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.
Ind. Eng. Chem., News Ed.
Inorg. Chem.
J. Am. Chem. Soc.
J. Agric. Food Chem.
J. Chem. Eng. Data
J. Chem. Educ.
J. Chem. Inf. Model.
J. Chem. Theory Comput.
J. Comb. Chem.
J. Med. Chem.
J. Nat. Prod.
J. Org. Chem.
J. Phys. Chem.
J. Phys. Chem. A
J. Phys. Chem. B
J. Phys. Chem. C
J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
J. Proteome Res.
Langmuir
Macromolecules
Mol. Pharmaceutics
Nano Lett.
News Ed., Am. Chem. Soc
Org. Lett.
Org. Process Res. Dev.
Organometallics
x
Select a CAS section from the 5 main topical divisions below:
Applied
Air Pollution and Industrial Hygiene
Apparatus and Plant Equipment
Cement, Concrete, and Related Building Materials
Ceramics
Electrochemical, Radiational, and Thermal Energy Technology
Essential Oils and Cosmetics
Extractive Metallurgy
Ferrous Metals and Alloys
Fossil Fuels, Derivatives, and Related Products
Industrial Inorganic Chemicals
Mineralogical and Geological Chemistry
Nonferrous Metals and Alloys
Pharmaceutical Analysis
Pharmaceuticals
Propellants and Explosives
Unit Operations and Processes
Waste Treatment and Disposal
Water
Biochemistry
Agrochemical Bioregulators
Animal Nutrition
Biochemical Genetics
Biochemical Methods
Enzymes
Fermentation and Bioindustrial Chemistry
Fertilizers, Soils, and Plant Nutrition
Food and Feed Chemistry
General Biochemistry
History, Education, and Documentation
Immunochemistry
Mammalian Biochemistry
Mammalian Hormones
Mammalian Pathological Biochemistry
Microbial, Algal, and Fungal Biochemistry
Nonmammalian Biochemistry
Pharmacology
Plant Biochemistry
Radiation Biochemistry
Toxicology
Macromolecular
Cellulose, Lignin, Paper, and Other Wood Products
Chemistry of Synthetic High Polymers
Coatings, Inks, and Related Products
Dyes, Organic Pigments, Fluorescent Brighteners, and Photographic Sensitizers
Industrial Carbohydrates
Industrial Organic Chemicals, Leather, Fats, and Waxes
Physical Properties of Synthetic High Polymers
Plastics Fabrication and Uses
Plastics Manufacture and Processing
Surface Active Agents and Detergents
Synthetic Elastomers and Natural Rubber
Textiles and Fibers
Organic
Alicyclic Compounds
Aliphatic Compounds
Alkaloids
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
Benzene, Its Derivatives, and Condensed Benzenoid Compounds
Biomolecules and Their Synthetic Analogs
Carbohydrates
General Organic Chemistry
Heterocyclic Compounds (More than One Hetero Atom)
Heterocyclic Compounds (One Hetero Atom)
Organometallic and Organometalloidal Compounds
Physical Organic Chemistry
Steroids
Terpenes and Terpenoids
Physical, Inorganic, and Analytical
Catalysis, Reaction Kinetics, and Inorganic Reaction Mechanisms
Crystallography and Liquid Crystals
Electric Phenomena
Electrochemistry
General Physical Chemistry
Inorganic Analytical Chemistry
Inorganic Chemicals and Reactions
Magnetic Phenomena
Nuclear Phenomena
Nuclear Technology
Optical, Electron, and Mass Spectroscopy and Other Related Properties
Organic Analytical Chemistry
Phase Equilibriums, Chemical Equilibriums, and Solutions
Radiation Chemistry, Photochemistry, and Photographic and Other Reprographic Processes
Surface Chemistry and Colloids
Thermodynamics, Thermochemistry, and Thermal Properties
Subscriber access provided by Arizona State University Libraries
Home
Browse the Journal
List of Issues
Most Read Articles
Author Index
Cover Art Gallery
Articles ASAP
Current Issue
Submission & Review
Information for Authors and Reviewers
Author Guidelines [PDF]
Submit a Manuscript or Review
Ethical Guidelines
Copyright & Permissions/RightsLink
ACS Author & Reviewer Resource Center
Open Access
About the Journal
About the Journal
Editor Profile
Editorial Board
Masthead [PDF]
Editorial Advisory Board [PDF]
Advertising Media Kit
Article
Previous Article
Next Article
Table of Contents
Distortion of Genetically Modified Organism Quantification in Processed Foods: Influence of Particle Size Compositions and Heat-Induced DNA DegradationFrancisco Moreano , Ulrich Busch , and Karl-Heinz Engel *Chair of General Food Technology, Center of Food and Life Sciences, Technical University of Munich, Am Forum 2, 85350 Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany, and Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority LGL, Veterinrstrasse 2, 85764 Oberschleissheim, Germany J. Agric. Food Chem., 2005, 53 (26), pp 99719979DOI: 10.1021/jf051894fPublication Date (Web): December 6, 2005Copyright  2005 American Chemical SocietyAbstract Milling fractions from conventional and transgenic corn were prepared at laboratory scale and used to study the influence of sample composition and heat-induced DNA degradation on the relative quantification of genetically modified organisms (GMO) in food products. Particle size distributions of the obtained fractions (coarse grits, regular grits, meal, and flour) were characterized using a laser diffraction system. The application of two DNA isolation protocols revealed a strong correlation between the degree of comminution of the milling fractions and the DNA yield in the extracts. Mixtures of milling fractions from conventional and transgenic material (1%) were prepared and analyzed via real-time polymerase chain reaction. Accurate quantification of the adjusted GMO content was only possible in mixtures containing conventional and transgenic material in the form of analogous milling fractions, whereas mixtures of fractions exhibiting different particle size distributions delivered significantly over- and underestimated GMO contents depending on their compositions. The process of heat-induced nucleic acid degradation was followed by applying two established quantitative assays showing differences between the lengths of the recombinant and reference target sequences (A, lA = 25 bp; B, lB = +16 bp; values related to the amplicon length of the reference gene). Data obtained by the application of method A resulted in underestimated recoveries of GMO contents in the samples of heat-treated products, reflecting the favored degradation of the longer target sequence used for the detection of the transgene. In contrast, data yielded by the application of method B resulted in increasingly overestimated recoveries of GMO contents. The results show how commonly used food technological processes may lead to distortions in the results of quantitative GMO analyses.
Keywords:
GMO; quantification; PCR; particle size; degradation
View: PDF | PDF w/ Links | Full Text HTML
Citing ArticlesRelated ContentCitation data is made available by participants in CrossRef's Cited-by Linking
service.
For a more comprehensive list of citations to this article, users are
encouraged to perform a search in SciFinder.
A High-Throughput Multiplex Method Adapted for GMO DetectionMaher Chaouachi, Galle Chupeau, Aurlie Berard, Heather McKhann, Marcel Romaniuk, Sandra Giancola, Valrie Laval, Yves Bertheau and Dominique BrunelJournal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 2008 56
(24),
11596-11606Abstract
| Full Text HTML
| PDF
| PDF w/ LinksDevelopment of Sensitive Crop-Specific Polymerase Chain Reaction Assays Using 5S DNA: Applications in Food TraceabilitySilvia Doveri and David LeeJournal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 2007 55
(12),
4640-4644Abstract
| Full Text HTML
| PDF
| PDF w/ LinksDevelopment of a Certified Reference Material for Genetically Modified Potato with Altered Starch CompositionWim Broothaerts, Philippe Corbisier, Hendrik Emons, Hkan Emteborg, Thomas P. J. Linsinger, and Stefanie TrapmannJournal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 2007 55
(12),
4728-4734Abstract
| Full Text HTML
| PDF
| PDF w/ LinksToward Metrological Traceability for DNA Fragment Ratios in GM Quantification. 1. Effect of DNA Extraction Methods on the Quantitative Determination of Bt176 Corn by Real-Time PCRPhilippe Corbisier, Wim Broothaerts, Sabrina Gioria, Heinz Schimmel, Malcolm Burns, Anna Baoutina, Kerry R. Emslie, Satoshi Furui, Yasunori Kurosawa, Marcia J. Holden, Hyong-Ha Kim, Yun-mi Lee, Mamoru Kawaharasaki, Della Sin, and Jing WangJournal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 2007 55
(9),
3249-3257Abstract
| Full Text HTML
| PDF
| PDF w/ LinksToward Metrological Traceability for DNA Fragment Ratios in GM Quantification. 2. Systematic Study of Parameters Influencing the Quantitative Determination of MON 810 Corn by Real-Time PCRDiana Charels, Sylvia Broeders, Philippe Corbisier, Stefanie Trapmann, Heinz Schimmel, Thomas Linsinger, and Hendrik EmonsJournal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 2007 55
(9),
3258-3267Abstract
| Full Text HTML
| PDF
| PDF w/ LinksA model freed from endogenous reference gene for quantification of genetically modified DNA by real-time PCR. 1. Quantification of DNA from genetically modified organisms in haplo-species materialsPingjian Deng, Dongyan Yang, Yongcun Yang, Xiaoke Yang, Liangrang Guo, Xiangyang Zhou, Xueling WangEuropean Food Research and Technology 2008 227
(5),
1485-1498New trends in bioanalytical tools for the detection of genetically modified organisms: an updateElisa Michelini, Patrizia Simoni, Luca Cevenini, Laura Mezzanotte, Aldo RodaAnalytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 2008 , Impact of genetic structures on haploid genome-based quantification of genetically modified DNA: theoretical considerations, experimental data in MON 810 maize kernels (Zea mays L.) and some practical applicationsDavid Zhang, Aurlie Corlet, Stephane FouillouxTransgenic Research 2008 17
(3),
393-402GMO quantification in processed food and feedFlorian WeighardtNature Biotechnology 2007 25
(11),
1213-1214Physical degradation of genomic DNA of soybean flours does not impair relative quantification of its transgenic contentFrdric Debode, Eric Janssen, Gilbert BerbenEuropean Food Research and Technology 2007 226
(1-2),
273-280A procedural approach for the identification of sources of uncertainty associated with GM quantification and real-time quantitative PCR measurementsMalcolm Burns, Hernan ValdiviaEuropean Food Research and Technology 2007, 7A new PCR-CGE (size and color) method for simultaneous detection of genetically modified maize eventsAnna Nadal, Anna Coll, Jose-Luis La Paz, Teresa Esteve, Maria PlaELECTROPHORESIS 2006 27
(19),
3879-3888Other ACS content by these authors:Francisco MoreanoUlrich BuschKarl-Heinz EngelRelated Content:PCR-Free Quantitative Detection of Genetically Modified Organism from Raw Materials. An Electrochemiluminescence-Based Bio Bar Code MethodAnalytical ChemistryZhu, Tang, Xing and Chen 2008 80 (10), pp 35663571Abstract: A bio bar code assay based on oligonucleotide-modified gold nanoparticles (Au-NPs) provides a PCR-free method for quantitative detection of nucleic acid targets. However, the current bio bar code assay requires lengthy experimental procedures including ...Abstract | Full Text HTML | PDF w/ Links | Hi-Res PDFGenetically Modified Organisms in FoodScreening and Specific Detection by Polymerase Chain ReactionJournal of Agricultural and Food ChemistryVollenhofer Burg Schmidt Kroath1999 47 (12), pp 50385043Abstract: PCR methods for the detection of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) were developed that can be used for screening purposes and for specific detection of glyphosate-tolerant soybean and insect-resistant maize in food. Primers were designed to amplify ...Abstract | Full Text HTML | PDF w/ Links | Hi-Res PDF
Article Options
PDF (864 KB)
PDF w/ Links (501 KB)
Full Text HTML
Abstract
Figures
References
Citing Articles
Add to ACS ChemWorx
Tools & Sharing
Add to Favorites
Download Citation
Email a Colleague
Order Reprints
Rights & Permissions
Citation Alerts
Metrics
Received 3 August 2005
Published online 6 December 2005
Published in print 1 December 2005
Sign in
Retrieve Detailed Record of this Article
Retrieve All References Cited for this Article
Retrieve All References Citing this Article
Explore by:
Author of this
Article
Any Author
Research Topic
Moreano, Francisco
Busch, Ulrich
Engel, Karl-Heinz
Search
Last *
First
Middle
Search
Topic *
Patents only search
Search
C&EN Online
Current Issue
News RSS Feed
More From Archives
1155 Sixteenth Street N.W.Washington, DC 20036
ICP13047075
Copyright  2016American Chemical Society
Products
Journals AZ
eBooks
C&EN
C&EN Archives
ACS Legacy Archives
ACS Mobile
Video
User Resources
About Us
ACS Members
Librarians
Authors & Reviewers
Website Demos
Privacy Policy
Mobile Site
Support
Get Help
For Advertisers
Institutional Sales
Live Chat
Partners