genetically modified organism (GMO) | Britannica.com
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Search
Click here to search
Genetically modified organism (GMO)
Table of Contents
Written By:
Julia M. Diaz
Judith L. Fridovich-Keil
Last Updated:
9-5-2016
See Article History
Alternative Title:
GMO
Related Topics
genetic engineering
manufacturing
engineering
recombinant DNA technology
heredity
Sir Martin J. Evans
bioengineering
Mario R. Capecchi
biotechnology
pharming
Genetically modified organism (GMO), organism whose genome has been engineered in the laboratory in order to favour the expression of desired physiological traits or the production of desired biological products. In conventional livestock production, crop farming, and even pet breeding, it has long been the practice to breed select individuals of a species in order to produce offspring that have desirable traits. In genetic modification, however, recombinant genetic technologies are employed to produce organisms whose genomes have been precisely altered at the molecular level, usually by the inclusion of genes from unrelated species of organisms that code for traits that would not be obtained easily through conventional selective breeding.Genetically modified (GM) barley grown by researchers on a site belonging to Giessen University Ralph Orlowski/Getty ImagesGMOs are produced through using scientific methods that include recombinant DNA technology and reproductive cloning. In reproductive cloning, a nucleus is extracted from a cell of the individual to be cloned and is inserted into the enucleated cytoplasm of a host egg. The process results in the generation of an offspring that is genetically identical to the donor individual. The first animal produced by means of this cloning technique with a nucleus from an adult donor cell (as opposed to a donor embryo) was a sheep named Dolly, born in 1996. Since then a number of other animals, including pigs, horses, and dogs, have been generated by reproductive cloning technology. Recombinant DNA technology, on the other hand, involves the insertion of one or more individual genes from an organism of one species into the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) of another. Whole-genome replacement, involving the transplantation of one bacterial genome into the cell body, or cytoplasm, of another microorganism, has been reported, although this technology is still limited to basic scientific applications.Genetically modified organisms are produced using scientific methods that include recombinant DNA Encyclopdia Britannica, Inc.
Similar Topics
gene editing
DNA sequencing
whole genome sequencing
recombinant DNA technology
GMOs produced through genetic technologies have become a part of everyday life, entering into society through agriculture, medicine, research, and environmental management. However, while GMOs have benefited human society in many ways, some disadvantages exist; therefore, the production of GMOs remains a highly controversial topic in many parts of the world.GMOs in agricultureGenetically modified (GM) foods were first approved for human consumption in the United States in 1994, and by 201415 about 90 percent of the corn, cotton, and soybeans planted in the United States were GM. By the end of 2010, GM crops covered more than 10 million square kilometres (3.86 million square miles) of land in 29 countries worldwideone-tenth of the worlds farmland. The majority of GM crops were grown in the Americas.Genetically modified corn (maize). S74/Shutterstock.comEngineered crops can dramatically increase per area crop yields and, in some cases, reduce the use of chemical insecticides. For example, the application of wide-spectrum insecticides declined in many areas growing plants, such as potatoes, cotton, and corn, that were endowed with a gene from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis, which produces a natural insecticide called Bt toxin. Field studies conducted in India in which Bt cotton was compared with non-Bt cotton demonstrated a 3080 percent increase in yield from the GM crop. This increase was attributed to marked improvement in the GM plants ability to overcome bollworm infestation, which was otherwise common. Studies of Bt cotton production in Arizona, U.S., demonstrated only small gains in yieldabout 5 percentwith an estimated cost reduction of $25$65 (USD) per acre owing to decreased pesticide applications. In China, where farmers first gained access to Bt cotton in 1997, the GM crop was initially successful. Farmers who had planted Bt cotton reduced their pesticide use by 5080 percent and increased their earnings by as much as 36 percent. By 2004, however, farmers who had been growing Bt cotton for several years found that the benefits of the crop eroded as populations of secondary insect pests, such as mirids, increased. Farmers once again were forced to spray broad-spectrum pesticides throughout the growing season, such that the average revenue for Bt growers was 8 percent lower than that of farmers who grew conventional cotton. Meanwhile, Bt resistance had also evolved in field populations of major cotton pests, including both the cotton bollworm (Helicoverpa armigera) and the pink bollworm (Pectinophora gossypiella).
Britannica Stories
In The News / Sports & Recreation
Mozart of Chess Defends Title
Demystified / Food
Whats the Difference Between Whiskey and Whisky? What About Scotch, Bourbon, and Rye?
Spotlight / Science
A Recent History of Climate Change
In The News / Society
Scandal in South Korea
See All Stories
Other GM plants were engineered for resistance to a specific chemical herbicide, rather than resistance to a natural predator or pest. Herbicide-resistant crops (HRC) have been available since the mid-1980s; these crops enable effective chemical control of weeds, since only the HRC plants can survive in fields treated with the corresponding herbicide. Many HRCs are resistant to glyphosate (Roundup), enabling liberal application of the chemical, which is highly effective against weeds. Such crops have been especially valuable for no-till farming, which helps prevent soil erosion. However, because HRCs encourage increased application of chemicals to the soil, rather than decreased application, they remain controversial with regard to their environmental impact. In addition, in order to reduce the risk of selecting for herbicide-resistant weeds, farmers must use multiple diverse weed-management strategies.
Test Your Knowledge
Science Quiz
Another example of a GM crop is golden rice, which originally was intended for Asia and was genetically modified to produce almost 20 times the beta-carotene of previous varieties. Golden rice was created by modifying the rice genome to include a gene from the daffodil Narcissus pseudonarcissus that produces an enzyme known as phyotene synthase and a gene from the bacterium Erwinia uredovora that produces an enzyme called phyotene desaturase. The introduction of these genes enabled beta-carotene, which is converted to vitamin A in the human liver, to accumulate in the rice endospermthe edible part of the rice plantthereby increasing the amount of beta-carotene available for vitamin A synthesis in the body. In 2004 the same researchers who developed the original golden rice plant improved upon the model, generating golden rice 2, which showed a 23-fold increase in carotenoid production.Another form of modified rice was generated to help combat iron deficiency, which impacts close to 30 percent of the world population. This GM crop was engineered by introducing into the rice genome a ferritin gene from the common bean, Phaseolus vulgaris, that produces a protein capable of binding iron, as well as a gene from the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus that produces an enzyme capable of digesting compounds that increase iron bioavailability via digestion of phytate (an inhibitor of iron absorption). The iron-fortified GM rice was engineered to overexpress an existing rice gene that produces a cysteine-rich metallothioneinlike (metal-binding) protein that enhances iron absorption.
Connect with Britannica
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Pinterest
A variety of other crops modified to endure the weather extremes common in other parts of the globe are also in production.
Table of Contents
Next page
GMOs in medicine and research
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article!
Contact our editors with your feedback.
More about genetically modified organism (GMO)
3 References found in Britannica ArticlesAssorted Referencesbiotechnology
(in biotechnology)
recombinant DNA technology
(in recombinant DNA technology: Genetically modified organisms)
trans fats
(in trans fat: Trans-fat alternatives)
Additional Reading
External Links
Environmental Protection Agency - Licensing and Permitting - Genetically Modified Organism
European Food Safety Authority - Genetically Modified Organism
LiveScience - GMOs: Facts About Genetically Modified Food
Article Contributors
Article History
MEDIA FOR:
genetically modified organism (GMO)
Previous
Next
Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
Pinterest
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
Edit Mode
Genetically modified organism (GMO)
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
Table of Contents
Tips For Editing
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind.
Encyclopdia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
Leave Edit Mode
You are about to leave edit mode.
Your changes will be lost unless you select "Submit".
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
Thank You for Your Contribution!
Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article.
Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed.
OK, Continue to Article
Uh Oh
There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later.
Close
Keep Exploring Britannica
anthropology
the science of humanity, which studies human beings in aspects ranging from the biology and evolutionary history of Homo sapiens to the features of society and culture that decisively distinguish humans...
atom
smallest unit into which matter can be divided without the release of electrically charged particles. It also is the smallest unit of matter that has the characteristic properties of a chemical element....
General Science: Fact or Fiction?
Take this General Science True or False Quiz at Encyclopedia Britannica to test your knowledge of paramecia, fire, and other characteristics of science.
10 Inventions That Changed Your World
You may think you cant live without your tablet computer and your cordless electric drill, but what about the inventions that came before them? Humans have been innovating since the dawn of time to get...
7 Celebrities You Didnt Know Were Inventors
Since 1790 there have been more than eight million patents issued in the U.S. Some of them have been given to great inventors. Thomas Edison received more than 1,000. Many have been given to ordinary people...
Science Quiz
Take this quiz at encyclopedia britannica to test your knowledge about science.
homologous recombination
the exchange of genetic material between two strands of DNA that contain long stretches of similar base sequences. Homologous recombination occurs naturally in eukaryotic organisms, bacteria, and certain...
Science: Fact or Fiction?
Take this quiz at encyclopedia britannica to test your knowledge about science facts.
computer
device for processing, storing, and displaying information. Computer once meant a person who did computations, but now the term almost universally refers to automated electronic machinery. The first section...
quantum mechanics
science dealing with the behaviour of matter and light on the atomic and subatomic scale. It attempts to describe and account for the properties of molecules and atoms and their constituents electrons,...
education
discipline that is concerned with methods of teaching and learning in schools or school-like environments as opposed to various nonformal and informal means of socialization (e.g., rural development projects...
6 Signs Its Already the Future
Sometimeswhen watching a good sci-fi movie or stuck in traffic or failing to brew a perfect cup of coffeewe lament the fact that we dont have futuristic technology
now. But future tech may...
View More
Stay Connected
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Pinterest
Newsletters
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
2016 Encyclopdia Britannica, Inc.
Menu
Home
Stories
Quizzes
Galleries
Lists
Login
Join
Search
Search
search
Genetically modified organism (GMO)
Table of Contents
Contents
IntroductionGMOs in agricultureGMOs in medicine and researchRole of GMOs in environmental managementSociopolitical relevance of GMOs
Media
Print
Print
Please select which sections you would like to print:
Cite
Cite
Contributors:
Julia M. Diaz and Judith L. Fridovich-Keil
Article Title:
genetically modified organism (GMO)
Website Name:
Encyclopdia Britannica
Publisher:
Encyclopdia Britannica, inc.
Date Published:
September 05, 2016
URL:
https://www.britannica.com/science/genetically-modified-organism
Access Date:
December 02, 2016
Share
Share
Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
Email
Feedback
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article.
Select feedback type:
Select a type (Required)
Factual Correction
Spelling/Grammar Correction
Link Correction
Additional Information
Other
If you are interested in being contacted for follow-up or potentially receiving contributor credit for implemented edits, please register or login.
Submit Feedback
If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode
(requires login).
Thank you for your feedback
Our editors will review what youve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.
Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
Search
Email this page
Email to
Email from
Subject
Comments
Cancel
Send
