Genetically modified organism
Your source for the latest research news
Mobile
Follow
Subscribe
Breaking News:
What Shaped the Evolution of the Orchid Mantis?
Fire-Setting Ice Age Hunters Destroyed Forests
How Water Conducts Electricity
Increasing Tornado Outbreaks: Climate Change?
How Running Water Carved Mars' Surface
Explaining Why Our Skin Doesn't Leak
Parkinson's Disease Linked to Gut Microbiome
How Zika Infects the Growing Brain
Diabetes Advance: Artemisinin Treatment
New Genetic Cause of Autism Identified
NEW: Find great deals on the latest gadgets and more in the ScienceDaily Store!
Reference Terms
from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Genetically modified organism
A genetically modified organism (GMO) is an organism whose genetic material has been altered using techniques in genetics generally known as recombinant DNA technology.
Recombinant DNA technology is the ability to combine DNA molecules from different sources into the one molecule.
Note:  The above text is excerpted from the Wikipedia article "Genetically modified organism", which has been released under the GNU Free Documentation License.
For more information, see the following related content on ScienceDaily:
Related Stories
Consumer Knowledge Gap on Genetically Modified Food
May 25, 2016  While consumers are aware of genetically modified crops and food, their knowledge level is limited and often at odds with the facts, according to a newly published
... read more
Regulating Genome-Edited Crops That (According to Current Regulations) Aren't GMOs
Feb. 25, 2015  A survey of rice, wheat, barley, fruit, and vegetable crops found that most mutants created by advanced genetic engineering techniques may be out of the scope of current genetically modified organism
... read more
Fight Between Genetically Modified Organisms And The Bugs They Repel May Not Be Over
Sep. 3, 2001  For all the promise of crops genetically modified to resist pests, the miracles of the laboratory are only good until the bugs outsmart them. Mark Whalon, a Michigan State University entomology
... read more
Was a Researcher Just Served a World First CRISPR Meal?
Sep. 5, 2016  For (probably) the first time ever, plants modified with the "genetic scissors" CRISPR-Cas9 has been cultivated, harvested and cooked. D professor in Plant Cell and Molecular Biology served
... read more
People Who Know About Genetically Modified Food Agree With Science: They're Safe
Nov. 9, 2016  People who know about genetically modified food agree with science, that they're safe. On the other hand, those who know plenty about global warming are cautious about the science that says
... read more
Research Revisiting the Safety of GM Weevil-Resistant Peas in Mice Contradicts Previous Risk Assessment Findings
Jan. 10, 2013  Researchers have conducted feeding trials with mice to investigate the allergenicity of genetically modified (GM) weevil-resistant peas. Development of the peas was discontinued in 2005 when a risk
... read more
New Technique For Modifying Plant Genes Developed
May 4, 2009  Researchers have used a genome engineering tool they developed to make a model crop plant herbicide-resistant without significant changes to its DNA. The new tool could help provide sustainable food,
... read more
Gene Barrier In Corn May Boost Trade, Environment
Oct. 12, 2000  Working with teosinte, a wild cousin of maize, a University of Wisconsin-Madison scientist has found a molecular barrier that, bred into modern hybrid corn, is capable of completely locking out
... read more
Robust Methods for GMO Detection Ready at Hand
Nov. 10, 2010  A new Reference Report lists 79 reference methods for GMO analysis which have been validated according to international standards. This Compendium presents the technical state of the art in GMO
... read more
Rutgers Scientists Create High-Protein Corn With Third World Potential
June 5, 2002  Rutgers geneticists have devised a new approach to create a more nutritious corn without employing the controversial biotechnology used in genetically modified foods. Instead of adding foreign DNA to
... read more
Share This Page:
RELATED TOPICS
Health & Medicine
Genes
Human Biology
Plants & Animals
Genetically Modified
Biotechnology and Bioengineering
Earth & Climate
RELATED TERMS
Transgenic plants
Introduction to genetics
DNA repair
DNA
Cloning
Genetically modified food
Plants & Animals News
December 2, 2016
What Shaped the Evolution of the Orchid Mantis?
Fire-Setting Ice Age Hunters Destroyed Forests
Parkinson's Disease Linked to Gut Microbiome
Gut Microbe Movements Regulate Circadian Rhythms
Latest Headlines
updated 12:56 pm ET
Restaurants Not Good at Explaining Risks of Undercooked Meat to Customers
Dec. 1, 2016  Front-line staff, such as servers in restaurants, are often trusted with providing customers with food safety information regarding their meals. A challenge to the food-service industry is that these ... read more
'Bickering' Flies Make Evolutionary Point
Dec. 1, 2016  When a male fruit fly gets aggressive, he rears up on his back four legs and batters his foe with his front pair. Neither fly seems particularly damaged by the encounter, but ... read more
Protective Barrier Inside Chromosomes Helps to Keep Cells Healthy
Dec. 1, 2016  Fresh insights into the structures that contain our genetic material could explain how the body's cells stay healthy. A protective barrier formed inside each of our chromosomes helps to prevent ... read more
Marijuana Use Gender Gap Widens, Mainly Among Low-Income
Nov. 29, 2016  Americans have experienced a six percent increase in pot use among men earning less than $20,000, corresponding to rising unemployment rate during the Great Recession, a new report ... read more
New Forecast Tool Helps Ships Avoid Blue Whale Hotspots
Nov. 29, 2016  Scientists have long used satellite tags to track blue whales along the West Coast, learning how the largest animals on the planet find enough small krill to feed on to ... read more
Corals Much Older Than Previously Thought, Study Finds
Nov. 30, 2016  Coral genotypes can survive for thousands of years, possibly making them the longest-lived animals in the world, according to a ... read more
Intensification of Land Use Leads to the Same Species Everywhere
Nov. 30, 2016  In places where humans use grasslands more intensively, it is not only the species diversity that decreases -- the landscape also becomes more monotonous, and ultimately only ... read more
Laser Technique Boosts Aerial Imaging of Woodlands
Nov. 30, 2016  A ground-breaking technique that allows green spaces to be mapped in 3D from an aircraft could boost biodiversity, aid human wellbeing and even help protect rainforests, ... read more
Shedding Light on the Origin of the Baleen Whale
Nov. 30, 2016  The origin of filter feeding in baleen whales -- the largest animal known to have ever existed -- is now better understood, thanks to research on 'Alfred' the 25- ... read more
Songbirds Sound the Alarm About Traffic Noise
Nov. 30, 2016  The alarm calls of songbirds are dramatically impaired by road traffic noise, a new study demonstrates. Research has shown that signals critical for the survival of animals ... read more
Do Restaurants Explain Risks of Undercooked ...
'Bickering' Flies Make Evolutionary Point
Benefits of Protective Barrier Inside ...
Marijuana Use Gender Gap Widening
New Tool Helps Ships Avoid Blue Whale Hotspots
Corals Much Older Than Previously Thought
Consequences of Land-Use Intensification
Lasers Boost Aerial Imaging of Woodlands
Shedding Light On Origin of the Baleen Whale
Songbirds Sound the Alarm About Traffic Noise
more stories
Featured Videos
from news services
Nestle's New Process Will Make Chocolate Sweeter With Less Sugar
Biggest Ever Coral Die-Off Recorded on Great Barrier Reef
Record Coral Kill-Off on Great Barrier Reef
California Targets Dairy Cows in Climate Fight
more videos
Print
Email
Share
Most Popular Stories
this week
HEALTH
Depression in Young People Affects the Stomach, Anxiety the Skin
This Is Your Brain on God: Spiritual Experiences Activate Brain Reward Circuits
It's All in the Eyes: Women and Men Really Do See Things Differently
Platypus Venom Could Hold Key to Diabetes Treatment
PHYSICAL & TECH
Theory That Challenges Einstein's Physics Could Soon Be Put to the Test
Bringing Silicon to Life: Scientists Persuade Nature to Make Silicon-Carbon Bonds
New Stars Discovery Shed New Light on Galaxy's Formation
First Signs of Weird Quantum Property of Empty Space?
ENVIRONMENT
Ancient Seagrass Holds Secrets of the Oldest Living Organism on Earth
Biggest Exposed Fault on Earth Discovered
Early America: Evidence of Original 1620 Plymouth Settlement Discovered
Major Finding Identifies Nitrogen as Key Driver for Gut Health
Strange & Offbeat Stories
HUMAN QUIRKS
Platypus Venom Could Hold Key to Diabetes Treatment
Toddler Robots Help Solve How Children Learn
Our Brains Have a Basic Algorithm That Enables Our Intelligence
What Your Choice of Smartphone Says About You
BIZARRE THINGS
'Ghost Imaging' With Atoms Demonstrated
Earth's 'Technosphere' Now Weighs 30 Trillion Tons
First Signs of Weird Quantum Property of Empty Space?
Inside Tiny Tubes, Water Turns Solid When It Should Be Boiling
ODD CREATURES
Predation on Pollinating Insects Shaped the Evolution of the Orchid Mantis
Ants Communicate by Mouth-to-Mouth Fluid Exchange
Ancient Rocks Hold Evidence for Life Before Oxygen
How Sand 'Holds Its Breath'
Toggle navigation
Menu
Full View
SD
SD
Home Page
Top Science News
Top Science Videos
Latest News
Latest Videos
Home
Home Page
Top Science News
Top Science Videos
Latest News
Latest Videos
Health
View all the latest top news and top videos in the health sciences, or browse the topics below:
Health & Medicine
Allergy
Alternative Medicine
Birth Control
Cancer
Diabetes
Diseases
Heart Disease
HIV and AIDS
Obesity
Stem Cells
... more topics
Mind & Brain
ADD and ADHD
Addiction
Alzheimer's
Autism
Depression
Headaches
Intelligence
Psychology
Relationships
Schizophrenia
... more topics
Living Well
Parenting
Pregnancy
Sexual Health
Skin Care
Men's Health
Women's Health
Nutrition
Diet and Weight Loss
Fitness
Healthy Aging
... more topics
Tech
View all the latest top news and top videos in the physical sciences & technology, or browse the topics below:
Matter & Energy
Aviation
Chemistry
Electronics
Fossil Fuels
Nanotechnology
Physics
Quantum Physics
Solar Energy
Technology
Wind Energy
... more topics
Space & Time
Astronomy
Black Holes
Dark Matter
Extrasolar Planets
Mars
Moon
Solar System
Space Telescopes
Stars
Sun
... more topics
Computers & Math
Artificial Intelligence
Communications
Computer Science
Hacking
Mathematics
Quantum Computers
Robotics
Software
Video Games
Virtual Reality
... more topics
Enviro
View all the latest top news and top videos in the environmental sciences, or browse the topics below:
Plants & Animals
Agriculture and Food
Animals
Biology
Biotechnology
Endangered
Animals
Extinction
Genetically Modified
Microbes and More
New Species
Zoology
... more topics
Earth & Climate
Climate
Earthquakes
Environment
Geography
Geology
Global Warming
Hurricanes
Ozone Holes
Pollution
Weather
... more topics
Fossils & Ruins
Ancient Civilizations
Anthropology
Archaeology
Dinosaurs
Early Humans
Early Mammals
Evolution
Lost Treasures
Origin of Life
Paleontology
... more topics
Society
View all the latest top news and top videos in the social sciences & education, or browse the topics below:
Science & Society
Arts & Culture
Consumerism
Economics
Political Science
Privacy Issues
Public Health
Racial Disparity
Religion
Sports
World Development
... more topics
Business & Industry
Biotechnology & Bioengineering
Computers & Internet
Energy & Resources
Engineering
Medical Technology
Pharmaceuticals
Transportation
... more topics
Education & Learning
Animal Learning & Intelligence
Creativity
Educational Psychology
Educational Technology
Infant & Preschool Learning
Learning Disorders
STEM Education
... more topics
Quirky
Top News
Top Videos
Human Quirks
Odd Creatures
Bizarre Things
Weird World
Store
Featured Deals
Online Courses
Gear + Gadgets
Web Services
Software
Lifestyle
Full View
Free Subscriptions
Get the latest science news with ScienceDaily's free email newsletters, updated daily and weekly. Or view hourly updated newsfeeds in your RSS reader:
Email Newsletters
RSS Feeds
Follow Us
Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks:
Facebook
Twitter
Google+
LinkedIn
Mobile Apps
Get the latest news from ScienceDaily via our free mobile apps, available for download on the following platforms:
iPhone/iPad
Android
Have Feedback?
Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions?
Leave Feedback
Contact Us
About This Site
|
Editorial Staff
|
Awards & Reviews
|
Contribute
|
Advertise
|
Privacy Policy
|
Terms of Use
Copyright 2016 ScienceDaily or by third parties, where indicated. All rights controlled by their respective owners.
Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide medical or other professional advice.
Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its staff, its contributors, or its partners.