Transgenic - Biology-Online Dictionary
Join for Free!
Login
Welcome to Biology Online!
Login
Remember me
Answers to all your biology questions
Home
Blog
Forum
Dictionary
Articles
Tutorials
Books
Directory
Share
Advertisement
Advertisement
Search
Quick links: ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ0-9OTHER
ViewView sourceHistory
Transgenic
Home 
TransgenicDefinition
adjective
Of, pertaining to, or relating to an organism that has genes from another organism put into its genome its genome through recombinant DNA techniques
Supplement
Transgenic is a term that describes an organism containing genes from another organism put into its genome through recombinant DNA techniques. An example of its usage is the term transgenic organism. A transgenic organism is one that contains a gene or genes which have been artificially inserted instead of the organism acquiring them through reproduction. A transgenic animal, for instance, would be an animal that underwent genetic engineering. It often contains material from at least one unrelated organism, e.g. from a virus, a plant, or from another animal. The process of introducing an exogenous gene is called transgenesis. One of its essential applications is for experimental research processes. Animal models are being created to introduce a particular disease for experimental studies. These models are referred to as transgenic disease models. Experimental mouse model, particularly referred to as transgenic mouse, is a mouse with a piece of foreign lincor DNA integrated into its genome through recombinant DNA techniques.
Word origin: Greek gennan (to produce)
See also:
recombinant DNA technology
Related term(s):
Transgenic organisms
Animals transgenic
Transgenic animal
Transgenic disease models
Transgenic mice
Retrieved from "http://www.biology-online.org/bodict/index.php?title=Transgenic&oldid=100731"
First |
Previous (Transgenesis) |
Next (Transgenic animal) |
Last
Please contribute to this project, if you have more information about this term feel free to edit this page.
This page was last modified on 30 December 2015, at 23:35.This page has been accessed 52,405 times.
What links here |
Related changes |
Permanent link
 Biology-Online.org. All Rights Reserved.
Register |
Login |
About Us |
Contact Us |
Link to Us |
Privacy Policy