Transgenic Animals
Transgenic Animals
Marie Buy, Editorial Assistant, Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC)
(From CCAC Resource Supplement, Spring/Summer 1997. Used
with permission of CCAC)
The term transgenic animal refers to an animal in which there has been
a deliberate modification of the genome - the material responsible for inherited
characteristics - in contrast to spontaneous mutation (FELASA September
1992, revised February 1995). Foreign DNA is introduced into the animal,
using recombinant DNA technology, and then must be transmitted through the
germ line so that every cell, including germ cells, of the animal contain
the same modified genetic material.
1. Historical background
Prior to the development of molecular genetics, the only way of studying
the regulation and function of mammalian genes was through the observation
of inherited characteristics or spontaneous mutations. Long before Mendel
and any molecular genetic knowledge, selective breeding was a common practice
among farmers for the enhancement of chosen traits, e.g., increased milk
production.
During the 1970s, the first chimeric mice were produced (Brinster, 1974).
The cells of two different embryos of different strains were combined together
at an early stage of development (eight cells) to form a single embryo that
subsequently developed into a chimeric adult, exhibiting characteristics
of each strain.
The mutual contributions of developmental biology and genetic engineering
permitted rapid development of the techniques for the creation of transgenic
animals. DNA microinjection, the first technique to prove successful in
mammals, was first applied to mice (Gordon and Ruddle, 1981) and then to
various other species such as rats, rabbits, sheep, pigs, birds, and fish.
Two other main techniques were then developed: those of retrovirus-mediated
transgenesis (Jaenisch, 1976) and embryonic stem (ES) cell-mediated gene
transfer (Gossler et al., 1986).
Since 1981, when the term transgenic was first used by J.W. Gordon and
F.H. Ruddle (1981), there has been rapid development in the use of genetically
engineered animals as investigators have found an increasing number of applications
for the technology.
2. Methods of creation of transgenic animals
For practical reasons, i.e., their small size and low cost of housing
in comparison to that for larger vertebrates, their short generation time,
and their fairly well defined genetics, mice have become the main species
used in the field of transgenics.
The three principal methods used for the creation of transgenic animals
are DNA microinjection, embryonic stem cell-mediated gene transfer and retrovirus-mediated
gene transfer.
a) DNA microinjection.
This method involves the direct microinjection of a chosen gene construct
(a single gene or a combination of genes) from another member of the same
species or from a different species, into the pronucleus of a fertilized
ovum. It is one of the first methods that proved to be effective in mammals
(Gordon and Ruddle, 1981). The introduced DNA may lead to the over- or under-expression
of certain genes or to the expression of genes entirely new to the animal
species. The insertion of DNA is, however, a random process, and there is
a high probability that the introduced gene will not insert itself into
a site on the host DNA that will permit its expression. The manipulated
fertilized ovum is transferred into the oviduct of a recipient female, or
foster mother that has been induced to act as a recipient by mating with
a vasectomized male.
A major advantage of this method is its applicability to a wide variety
of species.
b) Embryonic stem cell-mediated gene transfer.
This method involves prior insertion of the desired DNA sequence by homologous
recombination into an in vitro culture of embryonic stem (ES) cells. Stem
cells are undifferentiated cells that have the potential to differentiate
into any type of cell (somatic and germ cells) and therefore to give rise
to a complete organism. These cells are then incorporated into an embryo
at the blastocyst stage of development. The result is a chimeric animal.
ES cell-mediated gene transfer is the method of choice for gene inactivation,
the so-called knock-out method.
This technique is of particular importance for the study of the genetic
control of developmental processes. This technique works particularly well
in mice. It has the advantage of allowing precise targeting of defined mutations
in the gene via homologous recombination.
c) Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer.
To increase the probability of expression, gene transfer is mediated
by means of a carrier or vector, generally a virus or a plasmid. Retroviruses
are commonly used as vectors to transfer genetic material into the cell,
taking advantage of their ability to infect host cells in this way. Offspring
derived from this method are chimeric, i.e., not all cells carry the retrovirus.
Transmission of the transgene is possible only if the retrovirus integrates
into some of the germ cells.
For any of these techniques the success rate in terms of live birth of
animals containing the transgene is extremely low. Providing that the genetic
manipulation does not lead to abortion, the result is a first generation
(F1) of animals that need to be tested for the expression of the transgene.
Depending on the technique used, the F1 generation may result in chimeras.
When the transgene has integrated into the germ cells, the so-called germ
line chimeras are then inbred for 10 to 20 generations until homozygous
transgenic animals are obtained and the transgene is present in every cell.
At this stage embryos carrying the transgene can be frozen and stored for
subsequent implantation.
Transgenic Animals as Biotechnology
Transgenic animals are just one in a series of developments in the area
of biotechnology. Biotechnology has transformed the way in which we understand
processes such as engineering and manufacturing. These terms now include
the use of living organisms or their parts to make or modify products, to
change the characteristics of plants or animals, or to develop micro-organisms
for specific uses. The novel uses of biological techniques such as recombinant
DNA techniques, cell fusion techniques, mono and polyclonal antibody technology
and biological processes for commercial production have altered traditional
distinctions and methods (US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment,
1989). Genetic manipulations at the level of DNA have also changed long
held views as to what is considered to be animal, plant and human. In turn,
these changes have made it more difficult to evaluate the ways in which
animals are used and have obscured distinctions between pure and applied
research.
Consideration of the acceptability of creating specific transgenic animal
strains or genetic manipulation involving interchanging DNA between species
and kingdoms could be a simple animal care issue or a societal decision.
The following is an attempt to show what the ability to create transgenic
animals or engage in other forms of DNA manipulation means in terms of traditional
ACC functions, not forgetting that this impacts on wider considerations
of human responsibility for the welfare of other life forms.
The creation of transgenic animals is resulting in a shift from the use
of higher order species to lower order species, and is also affecting the
numbers of animals used. This shift in the patterns of animal use is being
monitored by the CCAC through the use of the Animal Use Data Form.
An example of the replacement of higher species by lower species is the
possibility to develop disease models in mice rather than using dogs or
non-human primates.
In the long term, a reduction in the number of animals used, for example
to study human diseases, is possible due to a greater specificity of the
transgenic models developed. On the other hand, the success of the method
has led to using its potential for investigating a wider range of diseases
and conditions. The actual use of some species may be increased, in addition
to the numbers of animals which are sacrificed as donors during the creation
process. The potential of the technology has also made it possible to consider
employing cattle, swine, sheep and goats as processing units to manufacture
proteins or as organ donors.
The complex interactive processes of living mammals are not reproducible
in vitro. However, transgenic animals provide a means of evaluating genetic
modifications in terms of anatomical and physiological changes in a complex
system. Transgenic models are more precise in comparison to traditional
animal models, for example the oncomouse with its increased susceptibility
to tumor development enables results for carcinogenicity studies to be obtained
within a shorter time-frame, thus reducing the course of tumor development
in experimentally affected animals. However, models are not strict equivalents,
so as with any other system care must be taken in drawing conclusions from
the data.
A representative, but non-inclusive, list of purposes for which transgenic
animals have been used indicates the wide ranging application of this biotechnology:
in medical research, transgenic animals are used to identify the functions
of specific factors in complex homeostatic systems through over- or under-expression
of a modified gene (the inserted transgene);
in toxicology: as responsive test animals (detection of toxicants);
in mammalian developmental genetics;
in molecular biology, the analysis of the regulation of gene expression
makes use of the evaluation of a specific genetic change at the level of
the whole animal;
in the pharmaceutical industry, targeted production of pharmaceutical
proteins, drug production and product efficacy testing;
in biotechnology: as producers of specific proteins;
genetically engineered hormones to increase milk yield, meat production;
genetic engineering of livestock and in aquaculture affecting modification
of animal physiology and/or anatomy; cloning procedures to reproduce specific
blood lines; and
developing animals specially created for use in xenografting.
Important general considerations include the extent to which experience
acquired in the laboratory with regard to husbandry should influence industry
standards for keeping animals created specifically as living machines for
the production of proteins, antibodies, etc. What words are appropriate
to describe and evaluate the condition of animals now used as production
units? The successful cloning of Dolly underlines the fact that innovative
developments in animal science are part of the mainstream of biotechnology.
In addition, the use of xenografts, at least at the public health level
makes animal and human welfare inseparable.
For animal welfare concerns regarding the use of transgenic animals,
see Transgenic Animals, Animal Welfare and Ethics
(optional).
For a practical application of transgenics, see Transgenic
Goats (optional).
Medical
applications of transgenics (optional)
Gametogenesis
From Sperm and Egg to Embryo
Genetic Regulation of Development
Organizing the Multicellular
Embryo
Generating Cell Diversity
The Foundations of Developmental Biology
Learning Resources
Research Resources
Developmental Biology Tutorial
The Developmental Biology Journal Club
Bibliography
Brinster, R. (1974). The effect of cells transferred into mouse blastocyst
on subsequent development. J. Exp. Med.:1049-1056.
Donnelly, S., McCarthy, C.R. and Singleton, R. Jr. (1994). The Brave
new World of Animal Biotechnology, Special Supplement, Hastings Center Report.
Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations (FELASA)
September 1992, revised February 1995. Transgenic Animals - Derivation,
Welfare, Use and Protection.
Gordon, J.W. and Ruddle, F.H. (1981). Integration and stable germ line
transformation of genes injected into mouse pronuclei. Science 214:1244-1246
Gossler, A. et al. (1986). Transgenesis by means of blastocyst-derived
embryonic stem cell line. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 83:9065-9069.
Jaenisch, R. (1976). Germ line integration and Mendelian transmission
of the exogenous Moloney leukemia virus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 73:1260-1264.
Moore, C.J. and Mepham, T.B. (1995). Transgenesis and animal welfare.
ATLA 23:380-397.
US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (1989). New Developments
in Biotechnology: Patenting Life. Special Report OTA-BA-370. 3pp. Washington
DC: US Printing Office.