International Society for Transgenic Technologies - International Society for Transgenic Technologies
Society
About Us
Board
Committees
ByLaws
History
Join
ISTT Blog
Awards
ISTT Prize
ISTT Young Investigator Award
Registration and Travel Awards
Poster Awards
FAQs
Contact Us
Members
Member Privileges
Renew
Request User/Password
Meetings
Next TT Meeting
Past TT Meetings
TT2016 Meeting
TT2014 Meeting
TT2013 Meeting
TT2011 Meeting
TT2010 Meeting
ISTT Affiliated Meetings
Resources
Transgenic Research
Livestock and Non-rodents
CRISPR-Cas Resources
Job Openings
General Links
Standard Nomenclature
Transgenic-list (tg-I)
Subscribe
FAQs
Access to tg-I archives
Springer Books
Member Login
Forgot your password?
Please note: Passwords have been reset as of the new website launch, please check your email for your temporary password.
MENU
Welcome to the New Website
If you are a current member, please check your email for your new temporary password.
OK, GOT IT
TT2017 - 1-4 October 2017 - Salt Lake City, Utah USALearn More
TT2017 - 1-4 October 2017 - Salt Lake City, Utah USALearn More
Research
The ISTT is involved in all levels of transgenic research in animals, from the animal technician to the senior scientist.
This link will take you to our research page that includes relevant publications, CRISPR/Cas9 resources and news pertaining to transgenic technology.
Training
The ISTT sponsors meetings, workshops and training courses in transgenic technology.
One of our most popular offerings is the Transgenic Technology (TT) meeting.
To see the latest offerings, and to see how to apply for ISTT sponsorship of your training opportunity, please click here.
Sponsor
The ISTT is very grateful to our generous sponsors who provide us with support to continue our work.
ISTT sponsors offer valuable goods and services necessary for transgenic technologies.
The resources provided to the ISTT allow us to host the TT meetings, provide awards for our members, and assist with website support.
Please visit our sponsors page.
ISTT MEMBERS HAVE ACCESSTO EXCLUSIVE INFORMATION ANDRESOURCES WORLDWIDE.Learn More Today
Already a Member?Login Here
CARD-IP Mouse Sperm and Embryo Cryopreservation Course: report Institut Pasteur- October 24th-28th 2016
The one-week CARD-IP Cryocourse, sponsored by ISTT, was held in Paris at the Institut Pasteur ...
Read More
Latest News
Mario
Capecchi, Nobel Laureate, to be awarded the ISTT Prize at TT2017
Published Friday, November
4, 2016
The International Society for Transgenic Technologies (ISTT, Inc.) is delighted to announce that the 11th ISTT Prize will be awarded to Dr. Mario Capecchi for his seminal work on homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 2007.The ISTT Prize is awarded to investigators who have made outstanding contributions to the field of transgenic technologies.
Remembering Laura Pozzi
Published Monday, October
3, 2016
August 7th 2016,Laura Pozzi, a pioneer of transgenesis in Italy, passes away at the age of 80.Dr. Pozzi was an associate professor at the University La Sapienza in Rome. During the 1980's, she was among the first researchers in Italy to set up a laboratory for the generation of transgenic mice, often with minimal equipment and at her own expense.
The 2016 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine awarded to Yoshinori Ohsumi
Published Monday, October
3, 2016
On 3 October, 2016, Prof. Thomas Perlmann, the Secretary of the Nobel Committee for Physiology or Medicine announced that the 2016 Nobel Prize would be awarded to Yoshinori Ohsumi for his discoveries of mechanisms for autophagy.
View All News
Upcoming Events
May11
Advances in transgenic animal models and techniques
Advances in transgenic animal models and techniques.
Organized by the Platform of Transgenic Rat and Immunophenotyping
Jun12
Transgenic Technologies in human diseases: principles, associated technologies, animal management, and ethics
Jun15
9th Workshop on Innovative Mouse Models
9th Workshop on Innovative Mouse Models
Leiden University Medical Center
Leiden, the Netherlands
Contact:
View All Events
International Society for Transgenic Technologies (ISTT, Inc.)
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo NY 14263, USA
Tel. +1 (716) 845-5843 | Fax +1 (716) 845-5908 | Email: ISTT@transtechsociety.org
Disclaimer
| Legal Notice
| Privacy Policy
| Webmaster
| Sitemap
| Website by Accrinet
Back to top