Whats the difference between Transgenic and Genetically Modified? | GMO Answers
Jump to navigation
[ login ]
U.S.A. (English)
Spanish EN | ES
Chinese EN | 
Portuguese EN | PT
Vietnamese EN | VI
Subscribe
Pinterest
Google+
Facebook
Tweet
Search form
Ask Your Questions
Explore the BasicsGMO Basics
Todays GMO Crops
GMOs and Your Health
The History of Crop Modification
The Future of Agriculture
Studies and ArticlesGMO Answers on Forbes
Dig DeeperMap - Global Approvals of GMO Crops
The Most Common GMO Myths
Frequently Cited GMO Studies
Educational Materials & Downloads
Glossary
About GMO ANSWERSAbout GMO Answers
Contributing Experts
GMO Answers Ambassadors
Events & Appearances
Ask Us Anything About GMOs!
How is your question answered?
Q:
Whats the difference between Transgenic and Genetically Modified?
Question Submitted By: millar.cody from Fort Morgan, CO ** Questions submitted to GMO Answers appear as written at the time of submission.
Questions are reviewed to ensure they conform with our house rules, but are never edited or altered by GMO Answers.
Notification Preferences
A:Expert Answer
By:
Dr. L. Curtis Hannah, Professor, University of Florida
on Tuesday, 4/19/2016 2:28 pm
Thanks for a great question!! Your question addresses much of the confusion in the popular press. To a geneticist, genetic modification means exactly what the words say: there is modification in the genetic material. This heritable form of variation of course is caused by mutation. Mutation can be natural or induced. Classic agents that induce mutation are some chemicals and some forms of radiation. For years, plant breeders have used induced mutation breeding to create favorable traits in plants as well as other organisms. These investigators treat seed with a powerful mutagenic agent and then screen progeny arising from these seeds for the trait of interest. The breeders also select against detrimental traits caused by the mutagen. These detrimental mutations are much more common than advantageous changes.
Natural mutations can also be caused by the radiation and chemicals we expose ourselves to in our normal life; however, most natural mutations occur when cells make mistakes in copying their DNA.
Transgenic refers to the movement or insertion of a gene into an organism that normally does not have a copy of that gene. It also can be natural or it can be induced. A recent paper (Kyndt et al 2015 Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences 112: 5844) documents the natural transfer of some bacterial genes into sweet potato using exactly the same transferring system that is used by scientists to make some of the transgenic crops now on the market. On top of this, some organisms have the ability to make new genes by combining pieces of older existing genes (reviewed in Lal and Hannah, 2005 Proc. Natl Acad Sciences 102:9993).
With this background, it should be clear that the use of the term GMO to describe transgenic organisms is simply wrong. But the misuse of the term is now so popularized that it is virtually impossible to change. It should also be clear that transgenic approaches are no more unnatural than mutation breeding, yet mutation breeding does not receive the negative press that transgenic research does. This distinction makes no scientific sense.
What does make infinite sense though is that some groups wish to increase their market share by demonizing transgenic plants. I find their position indefensible given how this gene technology can help feed people in developing countries, keep our food costs as low as possible and aid the environment by reducing our carbon footprint and reducing soil erosion.
Topic: Impact on Society, Impact on Farms 0 Comments | Add Comment Log in or register to post comments
To post a comment, please login.
Other Questions in this Category
Q:
How do I reconcile our Nations nutritional standards, the rise in obesity, the proliferation of industrialized agriculture and the loss of small farms, suburban sprawl, and the declining middle class. GMOs just seem to be part and parcel of a long...
Q:
What is your opinion mind you Id like the expert opinion not regurgitated source materials on the amount of food wasted each year in America, and its relation for our seeming need for GMOs to feed the world. Please be direct
Q:
Is there any risks or drawbacks
Q:
Why would farmers use GMos other than the natural way
Q:
I only buy my family organic apples and Im worried that the new GMO apple will contaminate all other apples, including organic ones. How could the company possibly stop this from happening?
See All Questions
Moderator Updates
Your question may not immediately appear on the site. Questions go through a spam filter and Community Manager review before appearing on the site.
Click here to learn more about the independent & company experts answering your questions.
Welcome to the GMO Answers community! Please remember to vote on the questions you'd like to see answered first.
Dr. L. Curtis Hannah
Professor, University of Florida
Dr. L. Curtis Hannah is a Professor of Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology teaching Advanced Genetics at the University of Florida. His areas of research include plant molecular biology, plant genetics, starch biosynthesis and transposable elements. Dr. Hannahs work focuses on engineering heat labile enzymes that play important roles in maize yield. Some variants give rise to as much as a 68% increase in maize yield in hot environments. He earned his Ph.D. in genetics at the University of Wisconsin after completing bachelors and masters degrees in biochemistry and genetics at Purdue University. He remains active in the family farming operations in Indiana.
Ask
Explore
Studies & Articles
Dig Deeper
About
Contact
GMO Answers on Forbes
GMO Answers - Japan
Educational Resources
GMO Answers Widget
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
 2013-2016 Council for Biotechnology Information
Follow Us
Like Us
+1 Us
The responses on all GMOAnswers.com websites do not necessarily reflect the views of all Council for Biotechnology Information member companies.
U.S.A. (English)
Spanish EN | ES
Chinese EN | 
Portuguese EN | PT
Vietnamese EN | VI