Transgenic Crops: An Introduction and Resource Guide
Home Page
News Updates
History of Plant Breeding
What Are Transgenic Plants?
How Do You Make Transgenic Plants?
+ Animation Demo
Evaluation & Regulation
Current Transgenic Products
Future Transgenic Products
Risks & Concerns
- Search this Site -
Entire site
News updates
Risks and concerns
Current transgenic products
Evaluation and regulation
Links to other sites
Scientific references
FAQs
Search ANY word
Search ALL words Search EXACT phrase Help
Authors:
Pat Byrne
Sarah Ward
Judy Harrington
Lacy Fuller (Web Master)
The
goal of this web site is to provide balanced information and
links to other resources on the technology and issues surrounding
transgenic crops (also known as genetically modified or
GM crops).
The site's authors are engaged in plant genetics research and teaching at
Colorado State University. They receive no funds from companies involved
in transgenic crop development, nor are they affiliated with groups
campaigning against such crops.
Funding for the web site currently comes from a
three-year grant by the United States Department of Agriculture under
the Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food Systems program.
To begin navigating through the
site, click one of the topics on the menu bar at left.
To receive
e-mails about site updates, send a blank e-mail to:
TransgenicCrops_SiteUpdates-subscribe@yahoogroups.com
This page is graphic heavy and employs javascript and Flash
animations.
All features may not be viewable on all systems.
Click here for a list of
requirements for full page viewing.
The American Society of Agronomy has awarded this web
site a certificate of excellence for presenting educational materials on
a web site (2001)
Scout Report Selection, September 1, 2000
This page is being tracked by Extreme Tracker.
Click on the
logo to view all site statistics.
Page last updated : January 12, 2006
Copyright Department of Soil and Crop Sciences at Colorado State University,
1999-2006. All Rights Reserved.
View CSU's copyright
policy.For permission to use specific portions of this site, contact gmcrops@lamar.colostate.edu.