Transgenic cows | Biotech Learning Hub
Go to www.sciencelearn.org.nz
Check out our new site currently under development, combining the Biotechnology and Science Learning Hubs with a new look and new functionality.
Skip to page content
Login
Email:
Password:
Forgotten password?
Register
Register
Glossary
Help
Search:
Search within:
Search this section
Advanced Search
Site navigation
Home
Focus Stories
Themes
Thinking Tools
News and Events
NZ Biotech
My Biotech
Transgenic cows
In this Story
Information sheets
Transgenic cows making modified milk
Transgenic cows making therapeutic proteins
Techniques used to make transgenic cows
Regulating transgenic cow research
Future uses of transgenic cows
Teaching Ideas
Unit plans
Ethics of transgenic cows
Worksheets
Student activity: Ethical frameworks and transgenics
Student activity: Ethics of modifying cows with human genes
Student activity: Role-play ethics and transgenics
Multimedia
Interactives
Making a transgenic animal
Galleries
Images
Video clips
Other resources
Transgenic cows: useful links
My Biotech Login
Email
Password
Register
Forgotten password?| Help
You are here:
Home
Focus Stories
Transgenic cows
Transgenic cows
Transgenic cows
Scientists at AgResearch in New Zealand have successfully produced healthy transgenic cows that make modified milk or human therapeutic proteins in their milk.
What is a transgenic cow?Transgenic cows are genetically modified (GM) cows. They have an extra gene or genes inserted into their DNA. The extra gene may come from the same species or from a different species.Transgenic cows produce proteins in their milk
Video: Uses of transgenic cows
The extra gene (transgene) is present in every cell in the transgenic cow. However, its only expressed in mammary tissue. This means that the transgenes protein will only be found in the cows milk and can only be extracted from there.Since 2000, scientists at AgResearch have been successfully producing transgenic cows that make modified milk or produce therapeutic proteins to treat human diseases.
Get information sheet: Transgenic cows making modified milkGet information sheet: Transgenic cows making therapeutic proteinsTechniques used to make transgenic cows
Transgenic cow with calf
Making a transgenic cow is a multi-step process.First, the gene for the desired product is identified and sequenced. Then a gene construct containing this desired gene is created using DNA cloning, restriction enzyme digests and ligation.The gene construct is then introduced into female bovine (cow) cells by transfection. Transgenic bovine cells are selected and fused with bovine oocytes that have had all of their chromosomes removed. Once fused with the oocyte, the transgenic cells chromosomes are reprogrammed to direct development into an embryo, which can be implanted into a recipient cow. After a 9-month gestation period, a female calf is born. She will only express the transgene in her milk during lactation after her first calf is born. This is because expression of the transgene is controlled by a promoter specific to lactating mammary cells.Get information sheet: Techniques used to make transgenic cowsTransgenic cows on the farm
Video: Transgenic cows and their offspring
Transgenic herds live on special farms with their own milking sheds. They are kept separate from regular herds. Transgenic cows look identical to normal cows. Researchers use ear tags and microchips to identify transgenic cows and their calves.One of the aims of the research programme is to show that transgenic cows pass on their transgenes to subsequent generations. If a transgenic cow is mated with a transgenic bull, she will have a higher chance of having transgenic offspring. However, if a transgenic cow is mated with a non-transgenic bull, her offspring will have a 50% chance of being transgenic, as offspring inherit half of their chromosomes from their mother and half from their father.Regulating transgenic cow researchNew Zealand has very strict regulations for working with transgenic animals. Before any research can be done, an application must be made tothe Environmental Protection Authority (EPA). Applications for transgenic research are open to the public for comment, and all applications are considered in consultation with Mori.Get information sheet: Regulating transgenic cow researchFuture of transgenic cow research
Transgenic calf
Transgenic cows have a wide variety of potential applications in biomedicine, agriculture, animal health and environmental sustainability.Get information sheet: Future uses of transgenic cowsThe future of transgenic cow research in New Zealand depends upon funding, regulations and public opinion. New Zealanders need to weigh up the risks and benefits associated with transgenic cows and decide what they consider to be acceptable.
Useful links
Information for high school students
A summary of information from the University of Otago about transgenic technology for high school students.www.otago.ac.nz/genetics/schools
Metadata
Published:
17 March 2010
Return to top
Related Content
Focus Stories
Mining milk
Themes
Biocontrol
Bioethics
Marvellous milk
Organisations
AgResearch
Environmental Protection Authority
ERMA
News
ERMA approves GM research
Award recognises biotechnologists achievements
Events
Genetic Engineering  panel discussion
About this site
Sitemap
Accessibility
Copyright and privacy
Contact us
Help
2005-2016 The University of Waikato