Transgenic Organisms - Genetics Generation
Pages Navigation Menu
Genetics Tutorial
Mendelian Genetics
Patterns of Inheritance
Recessive Inheritance
Dominant Inheritance
X-Linked Inheritance
Chromosomes
DNA and Proteins
Nucleotides and Bases
SNPs
DNA Mutations
Quiz
Glossary
Genetics Today
Recombinant DNA Technology
Transgenic Organisms
Synthetic Biology
Cloning
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)
Health Concerns of GMOs
Ecological Concerns of GMOs
Proposed Legislation
Whole Genome Sequencing
Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS)
Gene Therapy
Case Studies
Genetic Testing
Introduction to Genetic Testing
What is a Genetic Counselor?
Genetic Testing of Adults
Prenatal Genetic Testing
Ultrasound and Protein Markers
Amniocentesis
Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)
Cell-Free Fetal DNA
Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) Genetics
Types of DTC Testing
DTC Genetics: Pros and Cons
Discovering Ancestry
DNA and Race
Law and Ethics
Bioethic Considerations
Ethical, Legal and Social Implications (ELSI) Research
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA)
Analysis of GINA
Introduction to Eugenics
Is Eugenics Happening Today?
Ownership of Genetic Information
Who Was Henrietta Lacks
Informed Consent
Incidental Findings
Patenting Genes
Patenting Genes: Pros and Cons
About Us
Transgenic Organisms
Transgenic Organisms
Image courtesy of the National Human Genome Research Institute
Modern genetic technology can be used to modify the genomes of living organisms. This process is also known as genetic engineering. Genes of one species can be modified, or genes can be transplanted from one species to another. Genetic engineering is made possible by recombinant DNA technology. Organisms that have altered genomes are known as transgenic. Most transgenic organisms are generated in the laboratory for research purposes. For example, knock-out mice are transgenic mice that have a particular gene of interest disabled. By studying the effects of the missing gene, researchers can better understand the normal function of the gene.
Transgenic organisms have also been developed for commercial purposes. Perhaps the most famous examples are food crops like soy and corn that have been genetically modified for pest and herbicide resistance. These crops are widely known as GMOs (genetically modified organisms). Here are few other examples of transgenic organisms with commercial value:
* Golden rice: modified rice that produces beta-carotene, the precursor to vitamin A.
* Vitamin A deficiency is a public health problem for millions of people around the world,
particularly in Africa and Southeast Asia. Golden rice is still waiting regulatory approval.
* Goats that produce important proteins in their milk: goats modified to produce FDA-
approved human antithrombin (ATryn), which is used to treat a rare blood clotting
disorder in humans. Goats have also been genetically modified to producespider silk,
one of the strongest materials known to man, in their milk. Proposed uses for this
recombinant spider silk range from artificial tendons to bulletproof vests.
* Vaccine producing bananas: genetically engineered bananas that contain a vaccine. Bananas provide an easy means for delivering a vaccine (especially to children) without the need for a medical professional that is trained in giving shots.Edible vaccinesare still in development.
*Chymosin producing microorganisms: yeast, fungi, or bacteria modified to produce the enzyme
chymosin, which splits milk to make cheese. Traditionally, rennet (found in cow stomachs) is used to clot cheese. But, when the demand for firm cheeses surpassed the amount of rennet available, recombinant chymosin was developed and is used widely today.
*Blue roses: roses modified with pansy genes to express a blue color. The Japanese company Suntory developed the blue rose, which was previously unattainable through traditional selective breeding approaches. Before Suntorys success, blue roses were created by dyeing techniques.
CLICK HERE to learn more about recombinant DNA technology
Genetics Generation is committed to providing impartial and clear information that is engaging and accessible so that everyone can build a strong foundation for informed decision making.
Genetics Generation
-
Education is our Motivation
Copyright 2015 Genetics Generation