Transgenic plants
Transgenic plants are plants that have been genetically engineered, a breeding approach that uses recombinant DNA techniques to create plants with new characteristics.They are identified as a class of genetically modified organism (GMO).

Note:   The above text is excerpted from the Wikipedia article "Transgenic plants", which has been released under the GNU Free Documentation License.
For more information, see the following related content on ScienceDaily:
Related Stories 
Natural Selection on Not-So-Natural Plants
Nov. 14, 2010 — New research shows that while a genetically modified squash plant may be resistant to common virus transmitted by aphids, it's no match for bacteria transmitted by ... read more 
Promiscuous Plants May Spread Genes To Weeds
Sep. 3, 1998 — Crops engineered to contain genes that give them resistance to pests or the ability to produce lots of seeds, could pass these genes to their weedier cousins producing hybrid strains of super-weeds, ... read more 

Explosive Discovery On Genetically Engineered Tobacco Plant
Aug. 15, 2007 — Tobacco may be bad for human health, but a new study reports that a genetically engineered tobacco plant may be very good for the environment. It shows promise for cleaning up soil contaminated with ... read more 

Hairy Vetch Mulch Activates Genes For Phytonutrients In Tomatoes
Apr. 6, 2008 — Hairy vetch mulch activates, in regular tomatoes, some of the same metabolic pathways and genes that are activated in biotech tomatoes by the insertion of the ySAMdc gene, which makes tomato plants ... read more 
Tobacco Makes Medicine
Mar. 25, 2009 — Tobacco isn't famous for its health benefits. But now scientists have succeeded in using genetically modified tobacco plants to produce medicines for several autoimmune and inflammatory ... read more 

New Strategy To Prevent Genetically Altered Rice From Uncontrolled Spreading
Mar. 21, 2008 — A method of creating selective terminable transgenic rice has been developed. Unintended spreading of transgenic rice by pollen and seed dispersal is a major concern for planting transgenic rice, ... read more 

Modified Crops Reveal Hidden Cost Of Resistance
Oct. 29, 2009 — Genetically modified squash plants that are resistant to a debilitating viral disease become more vulnerable to a fatal bacterial infection, according to ... read more 
Consumers Willing to Pay Premium for Healthier Genetically Modified Foods
Sep. 14, 2011 — Consumers are eager to get their hands on, and teeth into, foods that are genetically modified to increase health benefits - and even pay more for the opportunity, new research ... read more 

Transgenic Sweet Corn No More Susceptible to Goss's Wilt Disease
Feb. 17, 2016 — A study tested whether glyphosate use, transgenic traits, or timing of inoculation with the bacterial vector of Goss's wilt affected disease incidence and yield in sweet corn. Results showed no ... read more 
First Evidence of Genetically Modified Plants in the Wild, Scientists Report
Aug. 6, 2010 — Scientists currently performing field research in North Dakota have discovered the first evidence of established populations of genetically modified plants -- canola -- in the ... read more 