Transgenic Crops  An Introduction and Resource Guide
Transgenic Crops  An Introduction and
Resource Guide
(http://www.colostate.edu/programs/lifesciences/TransgenicCrops/index.html)
Authors:
Pat Byrne
Sarah Ward
Judy Harrington
Lacy Fuller (Web Master)
The goal of this web site is to provide balanced information
and links to other resources on the technology and issues surrounding
transgenic crops (also known as genetically modified or GM crops). The site's
authors are engaged in plant genetics research and teaching at Colorado
State University.
They receive no funds from companies involved in transgenic crop development,
nor are they affiliated with groups campaigning against such crops. Funding for
the web site currently comes from a three-year grant by the United States
Department of Agriculture under the Initiative for Future Agriculture and Food
Systems program.
Transgenic
Crops Currently on the Market
(http://www.colostate.edu/programs/lifesciences/TransgenicCrops/current.html)
Crops,
Traits, and Acreage
Herbicide
Tolerance
Bt
Insect Resistant Crops
Insect
Resistance to Bt Toxins
Papaya
Global
Status of Approved Genetically Modified Plants
Transgenic
Foods on the Supermarket Shelves
Greenpeace's
List of GM and Non-GM Foods
Discontinued
Transgenic Products
Crops, Traits, and AcreageThe most important
transgenic crop in terms of acreage planted is soybean, followed by corn,
cotton, and canola.
The number of acres for each crop are given in the graph below (Source: James, 2001a, 2001b, 1997). This graph is also available in hectares instead of acres.
Adoption of transgenic crops in the United
States has been far greater than in
many other countries. The following graph shows the acreage of transgenic
crops in the United States
from 1996 to 2001.
In 1999, the area planted to transgenic
varieties was approximately half of the U.S.
soybean crop and about 25% of the U.S.
corn crop. The estimated worldwide area planted to transgenic varieties
in 2000 increased 11% over the 1999 area (James, 2000b). Most of the transgenic crop varieties
currently grown by farmers are either herbicide tolerant or insect
pest-resistant. In addition to the crops listed below, minor acreages
were planted to transgenic potato, squash, and papaya.
Transgenic
crop production area by country (source: James, 2000b)
Country
Area
planted in 2000
(millions of acres)
Crops
grown
USA
74.8
soybean,
corn, cotton, canola
Argentina
24.7
soybean,
corn, cotton
Canada
7.4
soybean,
corn, canola
China
1.2
cotton
South
Africa
0.5
corn, cotton
Australia
0.4
cotton
Mexico
minor
cotton
Bulgaria
minor
corn
Romania
minor
soybean,
potato
Spain
minor
corn
Germany
minor
corn
France
minor
corn
Uruguay
minor
soybean
For information on transgenic crop acreage as a percentage of the
total U.S.
acreage in 2000, see the news update entitled Acreage
for transgenic cotton and soybeans up, corn down.
Worldwide
production area of transgenic crops and traits (source: Science
286:1663, 1999).
Crop
Area
planted in 1999 (millions of acres)
Soybean
53.4
Corn
27.4
Cotton
9.1
Canola
8.4
Potato
0.3
Squash
0.3
Papaya
0.3
Trait
Herbicide
tolerance
69.4
Bt insect
resistance
22.0
Bt +
herbicide tolerance
7.2
Virus
resistance
0.3
Herbicide Tolerance
Weed control is one of the farmer's biggest challenges in crop
production, because poorly controlled weeds drastically reduce crop yield
and quality. Many herbicides on the market control only certain types of
weeds, and are approved for use only on certain crops at specific growth
stages. Residues of some herbicides remain in the soil for a year or
more, so that farmers must pay close attention to the herbicide history
of a field when planning what to plant there.
Herbicide tolerant crops resolve many of those problems because they
include transgenes providing tolerance to the herbicides Roundup
(chemical name: glyphosate) or Liberty (glufosinate). These
herbicides are broad-spectrum, meaning that they kill nearly all kinds of
plants except those that have the tolerance gene. Thus, a farmer
can apply a single herbicide to his fields of herbicide tolerant crops,
and he can use Roundup and Liberty
effectively at most crop growth stages as needed. Another important
benefit is that this class of herbicides breaks down quickly in the soil,
eliminating residue carry-over problems and reducing environmental
impact. Herbicide tolerant varieties are popular with farmers because
they enable less complicated, more flexible weed control. These varieties
are commonly marketed as Roundup Ready or Liberty Link
varieties.
Weed-infested
soybean plot (left) and Roundup Ready soybeans after Roundup
treatment. Source: Monsanto
For more information on herbicide tolerant transgenic crops see the
article "Herbicide Tolerant Soybeans: Why Growers Are Adopting
Roundup Ready Varieties", J. Carpenter & L. Gianessi, AgBioForum
online journal, Vol. 2 No. 2, http://www.agbioforum.org/
Bt Insect-Resistant Crops
European corn
borer (left) and cotton bollworm (right) are two pests controlled by Bt
corn and cotton, respectively.
Source: USDA.
"Bt" is short for Bacillus thuringiensis, a soil
bacterium whose spores contain a crystalline (Cry) protein. In the insect
gut, the protein breaks down to release a toxin, known as a
delta-endotoxin. This toxin binds to and creates pores in the intestinal
lining, resulting in ion imbalance, paralysis of the digestive system,
and after a few days, insect death. Different versions of the Cry genes,
also known as "Bt genes", have been identified. They are
effective against different orders of insects, or affect the insect gut
in slightly different ways. A few examples are shown in the table below.
Cry gene
designation
Toxic to
these insect orders
CryIA(a),
CryIA(b), CryIA(c)
Lepidoptera
Cry1B, Cry1C,
Cry1D
Lepidoptera
CryII
Lepidoptera,
Diptera
CryIII
Coleoptera
CryIV
Diptera
CryV
Lepidoptera,
Coleoptera
The use of Bt to control insect pests is not new. Insecticides
containing Bt and its toxins (e.g., Dipel, Thuricide, Vectobac) have been
sold for many years. Bt-based insecticides are considered safe for
mammals and birds, and safer for non-target insects than conventional
products. What is new in Bt crops is that a modified version of the
bacterial Cry gene has been incorporated into the plant's own DNA, so
that the plant's cellular machinery produces the toxin. When the insect
chomps on a leaf or bores into a stem of a Bt-containing plant, it
ingests the toxin and will die within a few days.
Bt insect-resistant crops currently on the market include

Corn: primarily for control of European
corn borer, but also corn earworm and Southwestern corn borer. A list of
approved Bt hybrids is available through the National Corn Growers
Association web site (http://www.ncga.com/biotechnology/know_where/know_grow_approved.htm).
Click on the "event" name to see the list of hybrids.

Cotton: for control of tobacco budworm and
cotton bollworm

Potato: for control of Colorado potato
beetle. Bt potato has been discontinued as a commercial product. See our Discontinued Products page for more information.
Corn hybrid
with a Bt gene (left) and a hybrid susceptible to European corn borer
(right). Source: Monsanto
Results of
insect infestation on Bt (right) and non-Bt (left) cotton bolls.
Source: USDA
Corn hybrids resistant to corn rootworm
Corn rootworm (Diabrotica spp.) is a serious pest of corn in
many U.S.
growing areas. It damages roots of young corn seedlings, resulting in
reduced growth and poor standability of the plant. This insect is
responsible for the application of the largest amount of insecticide to
U.S.
corn fields. What's more, to control this pest the insecticide must be
applied directly to the soil, where it may leave residues or leach into
the ground water. By replacing these chemical insecticides, corn
rootworm resistant hybrids may provide major benefits to environmental
quality.
Corn rootworm
feeding on a young maize root. Source: USDA
Range of
damage due to corn rootworm feeding, from severe (left) to no damge
(right). Source: USDA
Although rootworm-protected hybrids apparently offer pest management
and environmental benefits, there are serious concerns about development
of resistance to Bt in this adaptable insect. More information about
rootworm-resistant Bt hybrids is available in articles by Byrne (2001), Moellenbeck et al. (2001), and Ostlie (2001). Michigan State University has a discussion of rootworm-protected corn at
http://www.msue.msu.edu/ipm/CAT02_fld/FC4-11-02.htm#4.
Rootworm-resistant corn was approved in 2003.
Have Bt crops reduced the use of chemical pesticides?
The use of Bt varieties has dramatically reduced the amount of chemical
pesticides applied to cotton. According to a story in Science (Ferber, 1999a), US
farmers used 450,000 kg less pesticides on Bt-cotton than they would have
used on conventional varieties in 1998. Yields and profits also improved
in Bt-cotton fields. The benefits from Bt-corn, however, were not as
clear-cut. Due to the difficulty of effectively controlling corn borers
with insecticides, most farmers do not apply chemical controls to their
conventional corn fields. Thus, Bt hybrids substituted for chemical
pesticides on only about 20% of the total US
Bt-corn area. Profitability of Bt-corn is not as certain as for cotton;
it will vary over years and locations, depending on the intensity of the
corn borer population. See our discussion of pesticide use on Bt crops on this site.
Will insect pests become resistant to Bt toxins?
Although Bt genes have proven to be quite effective in the short term for
protecting against crop insect damage, as well as reducing fungal
contamination of corn [Munkvold and Heimlich, 1999, http://www.apsnet.org/online/feature/BtCorn/Top.html],
there are concerns that widespread use of Bt varieties will accelerate
development of resistance to Bt in the target pests. This could mean the
loss of Bt as an effective, environmentally friendly insecticide. In
response to these concerns, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has
mandated measures to reduce the risk of resistance development. These
measures depend on a combination of high dose of the Bt toxin and a
planting of refuges. A refuge refers to an area planted to a non-Bt
variety that is physically close to a field planted with a Bt variety, as
shown in the diagram below.
Diagram of the
BT refuge strategy, in which at least 20% of a farm's corn acreage must
be planted to non-BT corn. R = resistant European corn borer adult; S =
susceptible adult.
Beginning in 2000, the EPA requires that farmers growing Bt corn must
plant at least 20% of their total corn acreage to a non-Bt variety. The
rationale is that the few Bt-resistant insects surviving in the Bt field
would likely mate with susceptible individuals that have matured in the
non-Bt refuge. Thus, the insect genes (alleles) for resistance to Bt
would be swamped by the susceptible alleles. Whether this strategy will
work or not remains to be seen. Some of the potential problems with the
refuge strategy are:

The frequency of Bt-resistant alleles in
insect populations may be greater than assumed in refuge models.

Resistance to Bt in European corn borer
may be semi-dominant rather than recessive.

Resistant insects surviving in the Bt
field may mature several days later than susceptible insects in the
refuge, thus preventing their mating.
For information on compliance with the refuge requirements, see the
news updates entitled 29%
of Bt corn farmers in U.S. broke the rules last year, 13% of Bt corn farmers in U.S. still breaking the rules,
compliance improves, and 14% of U.S. Bt corn farmers still breaking the rules.
Ferre and Van Rie 2002 discuss the biochemistry and
genetics of insect resistance to Bt.
A discussion of designs for refuges is available from the University
of Illinois Extension Office
at http://www.ag.uiuc.edu/cespubs/pest/articles/200203e.html.
Pioneer Hybrid explains the rules for planting a refuge at http://www.pioneer.com/usa/agronomy/insects/yg_pug.pdf.
Additional Information
Because there are a number of web sites with extensive information on Bt
crops, we refer you to them for additional information on the topic.
Managing Corn Pests with Bt Corn: Some Questions and Answers.
F.B. Peairs, Colorado State
University. http://www.colostate.edu/programs/lifesciences/TransgenicCrops/BtQnA.html
Bt Corn: Health and the Environment. F.B. Peairs, Colorado
State University.
http://www.ext.colostate.edu/pubs/crops/00707.html
Bt Corn & European Corn Borer: Long-Term Success Through
Resistance Management. 1997. University
of Minnesota Extension
Service. http://www.extension.umn.edu/distribution/cropsystems/DC7055.html
Genetically modified, insect resistant corn: Implications for
disease management. G.P. Munkvold, Iowa
State University,
and R.L. Hellmich, USDA-ARS. http://www.scisoc.org/feature/BtCorn/Top.html
The Environmental Protection Agency's White Paper on Bt
Plant-Pesticide Resistance Management. 1998. http://www.epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA-PEST/1998/January/Day-14/paper.htm
Monarchs and Bt corn: questions and answers. 1999. Marlin
Rice, Iowa State
University. http://www.ipm.iastate.edu/ipm/icm/1999/6-14-1999/monarchbt.html
Now or Never: Serious New Plans to Save a Natural Pest
Control. Union of Concerned Scientists http://www.ucsusa.org/publications/pubs-home.html#Gene
100 Years of Bacillus thuringiensis: A Critical
Scientific Assessment. American
Academy of Microbiology http://www.asmusa.org/acasrc/pdfs/Btreport.pdf
Papaya
Papaya is a tropical fruit rich in Vitamins A and C, but susceptible to a
number of serious pests and diseases. The transgenic variety UH Rainbow,
resistant to the papaya ringspot virus, is currently in production in Hawaii.
Papaya is an important source of vitamins in tropical
areas. Source: USDA
For more information, refer to:
Transgenic virus resistant papaya: New hope for controlling papaya
ringspot virus in Hawaii.
http://www.apsnet.org/education/feature/papaya/Top.htm
Cornell University's page on virus resistant GM crops, including
payapa. http://www.comm.cornell.edu/gmo/traits/virusres.html
Global Status of Approved Genetically Modified
Plants
Agriculture and Biotechnology Strategies (Canada) Inc. maintains a
database of trangenic plants that have been approved for environmental
release, use in livestock feed, or use in human food. Information is
organized by crop and by trait. The information can be accessed at http://www.agbios.com/_Synopsis.asp.
Transgenic Foods on the Supermarket Shelves
The cooperative extension office at Cornell
University has assessed the
likelihood that food products contain genetically engineered ingredients.
Their assessment is available at http://www.comm.cornell.edu/gmo/crops/eating.html.
Greenpeace's List of GM and Non-GM Foods
Greenpeace, which campaigns against transgenic foods, maintains a list of
food brands that they claim contain or do not contain transgenic
ingredients. The list is available at http://www.truefoodnow.org/shopping_list.html.
Discontinued Transgenic Products
Several transgenic products that received approval for marketing have
been discontinued for a variety of reasons. Some, such as the FlavrSavr
tomato and NewLeaf potato, were available for years before they were
discontinued. We have assembled a list
of these products with links to more information about their history
and the reason for their disappearance.
Page last updated : March 31, 2003
 Copyright Center for Life Sciences and Department of
Soil and Crop Sciences at Colorado State University, 1999-2003. All Rights
Reserved.
View CSU's copyright policy
Risks And Concerns
(http://www.colostate.edu/programs/lifesciences/TransgenicCrops/risks.html)
The introduction of transgenic crops and foods into the existing food
production system has generated a number of questions about possible
negative consequences. People with concerns about this technology have
reacted in many ways, from participating in letter-writing campaigns to
demonstrating in the streets to vandalizing institutions where transgenic
research is being conducted. What are the main concerns? What scientific
support is there for these concerns?
The issues surrounding objections to transgenic crops can be broadly
grouped into concerns about
damage
to human health
allergenicity
horizontal transfer and antibiotic resistance
eating foreign DNA
cauliflower mosaic virus promoter
changed nutrient levels
damage
to the natural environment
Monarch butterfly
crop-to-weed gene flow
antibiotic resistance
leakage of GM proteins into soil
reductions in pesticide spraying: are they real?
disruption
of current practices of farming and food production in developed
countries
crop-to-crop gene flow
disruption
of traditional practices and economies in less developed countries.
These are complex issues and a thorough treatment of each one would
occupy volumes. For each topic we provide a short discussion with a link
to a longer discussion and outside resources.
Concerns about human health
Allergenicity
The possibility that we might see an increase in the number of allergic
reactions to food as a result of genetic engineering has a powerful
emotional appeal because many of us experienced this problem before the
advent of transgenic crops, or know of someone who did.
However, there is no evidence so far that
genetically engineered foods are more likely to cause allergic
reactions than are conventional foods. Tests of several dozen
transgenic foods for allergenicity have uncovered only a soybean that
was never marketed and the now-famous StarLink corn. Although the
preliminary finding is that StarLink corn is probably not allergenic,
the scientific debate continues. Every year some people discover that
they have developed an allergy to a common food such as wheat or eggs,
and some people may develop allergies to transgenic foods in the
future, but there is no evidence that transgenic foods pose more of a
risk than conventional foods do.
More on allergenicity
Common sites for allergic reactions. Source: FDA
Horizontal transfer and antibiotic resistance
The use of antibiotic resistance markers in the development of transgenic
crops has raised concerns about whether transgenic foods will play a part
in our loss of ability to treat illnesses with antibiotic drugs. At
several stages of the laboratory process, developers of transgenic crops
use DNA that codes for resistance to certain antibiotics, and this DNA
becomes a permanent feature of the final product although it serves no
purpose beyond the laboratory stage. Will transgenic foods contribute to
the existing problems with antibiotic resistance?
Antibiotic pills.
Photo: www.molbio.princeton.edu
One aspect of this topic is the risk of horizontal
gene transfer, that is, transfer of DNA from one organism to another
outside of the parent-to-offspring channel. Transfer of a resistance
gene from transgenic food to micro-organisms that normally inhabit our
stomach and intestines, or to bacteria that we ingest along with food,
could help those micro-organisms to survive an oral dose of antibiotic
medicine. Although horizontal transfer of DNA does occur under natural
circumstances and under laboratory conditions, it is probably quite
rare in the acid environment of the human stomach.
Another concern is that the enzyme product of the DNA might be
produced at low levels in transgenic plant cells. While high processing
temperatures would inactivate the enzyme in processed foods, ingestion of
fresh or raw transgenic foods could result in the stomach containing a
small amount of an enzyme that inactivates an orally administered dose of
the antibiotic. This issue was raised during the approval processes for
Calgene's FlavrSavr tomato and Ciba-Geigy's Bt corn 176. In both cases,
tests showed that orally administered antibiotics would remain effective.
While the risks from antibiotic resistance genes in transgenic plants
appear to be low, steps are being taken to reduce the risk and to phase
out their use.
More on antibiotic resistance
Eating foreign DNA
When scientists make a transgenic plant, they insert pieces of DNA
that did not originally occur in that plant. Often these pieces of DNA
come from entirely different species, such as viruses and bacteria. Is
there any danger from eating this "foreign" DNA?
Diagram of DNA. Source: Foodfuture, Food and Drink
Federation
We eat DNA every time we eat a meal. DNA is the
blueprint for life and all living things contain DNA in many of their
cells. What happens to this DNA? Most of it is broken down into more
basic molecules when we digest a meal. A small amount is not broken
down and is either absorbed into the blood stream or excreted in the
feces. We suspect that the body's normal defense system eventually
destroys this DNA. Further research in this area would help to
determine exactly how humans have managed to eat DNA for thousands of
years without noticing any effects from the tiny bits that sneak into
the bloodstream.
So far there is no evidence that DNA from transgenic crops is more
dangerous to us than DNA from the conventional crops, animals, and their
attendant micro-organisms that we have been eating all our lives.
More on eating DNA
CaMV promoter
When scientists use transgenic technology to put a new gene into a plant,
they put in additional pieces of DNA to direct the activity of that gene.
One of these pieces is the "promoter" that turns the gene on.
Cauliflower mosaic virus infection in canola.
Source: Institute National de la Recherche
Agronomique, Versailles-Grignon
The most widely used promoter is the cauliflower
mosaic virus 35S promoter, often abbreviated as the CaMV promoter or
the 35S promoter. This promoter was obtained from the virus that causes
cauliflower mosaic disease in several vegetables, such as cauliflower,
broccoli, cabbage, and canola. There are concerns that the CaMV
promoter might be harmful if it were to invade our cells and turn on
our genes.
A multi-step chain of events would have to occur for the CaMV promoter
to escape the normal digestive breakdown process, penetrate a cell of the
body, and insert itself into a human chromosome. While there have been no
tests to determine whether the CaMV promoter has invaded human tissues,
experiments with mice indicate that normal body defenses eliminate stray
fragments of foreign DNA that sneak into the blood stream from the
digestive tract.
There is some evidence that the CaMV promoter poses little threat to
human health. People have been eating it in small quantities for hundreds
of years when we eat vegetables that are infected with the disease.
Although vegetables heavily infected with CaMV are unappetizing, there
have been no documented negative effects on health from eating the virus
or its promoter.
More on the CaMV promoter
Changed nutrient levels
How do genetically engineered foods compare with conventional foods in
nutritional quality? This is an important issue, and one for which there
will probably be much research in the future, as crops that are
engineered specifically for improved nutritional quality are marketed.
However, there have been only a few studies to date comparing the
nutritional quality of genetically modified foods to their unmodified counterparts.
The central question for GE crops that are currently available is
whether plant breeders have accidentally changed the nutritional
components that we associate with conventional cultivars of a crop.
Because isoflavones are thought to play a role in preventing heart
disease, breast cancer, and osteoporosis, the isoflavone content of
RoundupReady soybeans has been investigated by several researchers.
The studies completed so far do not resolve the issue of whether
RoundupReady soybeans have isoflavone levels comparable to conventional
varieties, but the differences found in experiments appear to be small
or moderate in comparison with natural variation in isoflavone levels.
Additional evidence may clarify the arguments for and against Roundup
applications as a risk factor in soybean cultivation.
Industry studies submitted in support of applications for permission
to sell transgenic crops indicate that the nutritional components that
are commonly tested are similar in transgenic foods and conventional foods.
More on nutrient levels
Source: Marck L. Tucker, USDA/ARS
Concerns about damage to the
environment
Monarch butterfly
Source: www.MonarchWatch.com
The suggestion that Bt corn pollen might kill
Monarch butterfly larvae galvanized public interest in the effect of
transgenic crops on the environment. We present a full discussion of
this issue under Hot Topics: Monarch Butterfly.
Crop-to-weed gene flow
Hybridization of crops with nearby weeds may enable weeds to acquire
traits we wish they didn't have, such as resistance to herbicides.
Research results indicate that crop traits may escape from cultivation
and persist for many years in wild populations. Genes that provide a
competitive edge, such as resistance to viral disease, could benefit weed
populations around a crop field.
Many cultivated crops have sexually compatible wild
relatives with which they hybridize under favorable circumstances. The
likelihood that transgenes will spread can be different for each crop
in each area of the world.
For example, there are no wild relatives of corn in
the United States
or in Europe for transgenic corn to pollinate,
but such wild relatives exist in Mexico.
Soybeans and wheat are self-pollinating crops, so the
risk of transgenic pollen moving to nearby weeds is small. However,
that small risk must balanced against the fact that there are wild
relatives of wheat in the United States.
There are no wild relatives of soybean in the United
States, but such wild relatives
exist in China.
Thus each crop must be evaluated individually for the risk of gene flow
in the area where it will be grown.
More on crop-to-weed gene flow
Corn tassels shedding pollen. Source:
www.rockandrollagronomy.com
Antibiotic resistance
There is also concern that transgenic plants growing in the field will
transfer their antibiotic resistance genes to soil micro-organisms, thus
causing a general increase in the level of antibiotic resistance in the
environment. However, many soil organisms have naturally occurring
resistance as a defense against other organisms that generate
antibiotics, so genes contributed occasionally by transgenic plants are
unlikely to cause a change in the existing level of antibiotic resistance
in the environment.
More on antibiotic resistance
Leakage of GM proteins into soil
Source: Rural Life
Center, Kenyon
College,
Gambier, Ohio.
Many plants leak chemical compounds into the soil through their
roots. There are concerns that transgenic plants may leak different
compounds than conventional plants do, as an unintended consequence of
their changed DNA.
Speculation that this may be happening leads to concern about
whether the communities of micro-organisms living near transgenic
plants may be affected. The interaction between plants and soil
micro-organisms is very complex, with the micro-organisms that live
around plant roots also leaking chemical compounds into the soil. Much
more research must be done before we understand the relationships that
occur between micro-organisms and conventional crops. Attempts to
discover whether transgenic plants are changing the soil environment,
and whether they are changing it in good ways or bad ways, are hindered
by our lack of basic scientific knowledge.
More on leakage of proteins into soil
Reductions in pesticide spraying: are they real?
One of the most appealing arguments in favor of transgenic plants is
the potential for reducing the damage we do to our environment with
conventional methods of farming. Pest-resistant crops such as Bt corn
and Bt cotton have been promoted as a means to reduce the spraying of
pesticides, while herbicide-tolerant crops such as RoundupReady
soybeans are said to reduce the application of herbicides. Large
reductions in chemical spraying have been claimed to result from the
introduction of these transgenic varieties. Are the claims true?
Bt cotton is the only crop for which claims of reduced spraying are
clear. Analysts paint a mixed picture on the results of planting
RoundupReady soybeans. Bt corn and herbicide-tolerant cotton and corn
have not resulted in clear reductions in the spraying of chemicals.
More on pesticide spraying
Cotton boll. Source: www.mahyco.com
Concerns about damage to
current farming practices
Crop-to-crop gene flow
Hybridization of transgenic crops with nearby conventional crops raises
concerns about separation distances to ensure purity of crops and about
who must pay if unwanted genes move into a neighbor's crop. As
"Identity Preservation" and segregation of GM from non-GM crops
become factors in marketing products, it will be important to ensure that
hybridization is not occurring in the field.
Experimental plots of transgenic canola,
which has been shown to hybridize with
canola in neighboring fields.
Many factors influence the potential for gene flow
from crop to crop. Some crops are highly outcrossing, with pollen
carried to other fields by wind and by insects. Other species are
highly self-pollinating, with little potential for pollen transfer to
neighboring plants. Because of the differences among crops species,
every case must be evaluated individually for potential to contribute
to gene flow from transgenic to conventional crops.
If GM pollen pollinates plants in a neighboring field, then the issue
of genetic trespass may arise. What level of GM presence, if any, should
be allowed in products that are sold as organic or conventional? Should
GM farmers and companies bear responsibility for preventing gene flow, or
should conventional and organic farmers pay to protect their products
from gene flow? Should GM versions of outcrossing plants be banned as too
risky, while GM versions of self-pollinating plants are permitted? These
issues have already prompted several lawsuits and they will continue to
be a factor in the development and use of trangenic plants for years to
come.
More on crop-to-crop gene flow
Page last updated : September 20, 2002
 Copyright Center for Life Sciences and Department of
Soil and Crop Sciences
at Colorado State University, 1999-2002. All Rights Reserved.
View CSU's copyright policy