Transgenic Crops | Publication Summary | ATTRA | National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service
Hi There!
Forgot your password?
First visit? Please start here.
To gain access and reap all the benefits of our website you must subscribe.SUBSCRIBERSIGN INSubscription BenefitsOur subscription packages are designed to help you add value to your existing Sustainable Agriculture resources. Your subscription not only helps us keep the project on its feet, it also helps the movement toward a more sustainable and healthy agricultural system become a reality.
Yearly subscriptions are $50.
Here's what you get:
Unlimited Publication Downloads
Access to Webinars
Farm Internship Listing Service
Browse Sustainable Ag Internships
Weekly E-mail Newsletter
Searchable Databases
If you'd like your subscription to renew automatically each year,please click here and check ENABLE AUTO-RENEW. Thank you.

We also provide a $5 day pass which gives you 24 hours to add or update an internship listing in our database.
We also offer a free weekly newsletter.
 Learn More ...about all of our subscription benefits and programs. Questions? Just ask.
SUBSCRIBETO ATTRACall our experts:
1-800-346-9140
 Show Menu
Home
Contact
Events
News
Funding
Tutorials
Webinars/Videos
Podcasts
Publications
Internships
Espaol
About
Donate
Search
Search This Site
What Is Sustainable Agriculture?
Master Publication List
Search Our Databases
Urban Agriculture
Energy Alternatives
Beginning Farmer
Field Crops
Horticultural Crops
Livestock & Pasture
Local Food Systems
Marketing, Business & Risk Management
Organic Farming
Pest Management
Soils & Compost
Water Management
Other Resources
Home Page
Newsletters
 Privacy Policy
 Newsletter Archives
XML Feeds
RSS 2.0: Events, Breaking News, Funding Opportunities
Atom: Events, Breaking News, Funding Opportunities
What is RSS?
NCAT strives to make our information available to everyone who needs it. If you are a limited-access or low-income farmer and find that one of our publications is just not in your budget, please call 800-346-9140.
Home>Horticultural Crops>
Transgenic Crops (Summary)
Transgenic Crops
Digital Price:
Free
Print Price:
$3.00
By Jeff Schahczenski and Katherine Adam
Published: 2006
Updated: 2006
 NCAT
IP189
32
pages
or
or
Introduction
This publication describes the basics of genetic modification or genetic engineering for agricultural purposes and presents a brief history of the technology and the governing policies surrounding it. The publication offers a brief overview of the main agricultural crops that have been genetically modified, the characteristics they express, and the market roles they play. Unintended consequences, economic considerations, and safety concerns surrounding the cultivation and dissemination of transgenic crops are also discussed. Biopharmaceutical aspects of transgenic crops are also briefly addressed. Economic, legal, and management concerns associated with these types of crops are discussed, as well as political and regulatory aspects. Implications of transgenic technologies for sustainable agriculture are briefly addressed.
Table of Contents
Introduction
What Are Transgenic Crops?
Unintended Effects
Commercial Transgenic Crops and Their Traits
Issues Facing Farmers and Ranchers
Crop Yield, Costs, and Profitability
Organic Industry
Influence on Public Research
Industry Concentration and Farmers Right to Save Seed
Regulation of Transgenic Crops and Apportionment of Liability
Conclusion
References
Appendices
Note: Digital downloads are in full color. Printed, mailed copies are only available in black & white.
Back to top
This page was last updated on: June 7, 2016
ATTRA - A National Sustainable Agriculture Assistance Program - is developed and managed by the National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT).
Visit the NCAT website for more information on our other sustainable agriculture and energy projects.
Support | Espaol | Text Only | Terms of Service | Site Map | Comments | Privacy Policy | Facebook | Donate
Copyright  NCAT 1997-2016. All Rights Reserved.