International Society for Transgenic Technologies (ISTT)
SOCIETY
About us
Join/Renew
ISTT Bylaws
ISTT Board
ISTT Committees
ISTT blog
ISTT Prize
ISTT Registration Awards
ISTT Young Investigator Award
ISTT Best Poster Awards
ISTT History
FAQs
Contact us
MEMBERS
Members-Only section
Join/Renew
Request ID number
Request user/password
MEETINGS
Next TT Meeting
Past TT Meetings
Next other meetings
Past other meetings
10th TT anniversary booklet
TT2010 meeting
TT2011 meeting
TT2013 meeting
TT2014 meeting
TT2016 meeting
RESOURCES
General Links
Transgenic Facilities
Transgenic-list (tg-l)
ISTT Transgenic Survey
Transgenic Research
Springer Books
Online Books
Standard Nomenclature
Livestock and non-rodents
CRISPR-Cas resources
Time and Weather
Sponsors
Search ISTT website
Map of ISTT website
TRANSGENIC-LIST [tg-l] HOMEPAGE
The transgenic-list [tg-l] is hosted at the ISTT web server
The list address is: transgenic-list@transtechsociety.org.
Click here to subscribe to the tg-l
.
The transgenic-list (commonly referred to as the tg-l) was created by Peter Sobieszczuk in July, 1996, to serve the global research community specializing in genetic modifications of experimental laboratory animals. Since then, three academic institutions have played a major role in hosting the tg-l: the IGBMC in Strasbourg, France; the University of Manchester, UK; and the Imperial College in London, UK, where it was last hosted before Peter Sobieszczuk and the ISTT agreed on September 30, 2011, to move it to the ISTT web server. The transfer of the tg-l to the ISTT web server took place on December 21st, 2011. The ISTT would like to acknowledge the excellent work of Peter and his assistants in maintaining the list since its inception for the benefit of everyone who has been a part of this list. The tg-l has proven to be a valuable source of knowledge and advice, helping many newcomers to the field of animal transgenesis, and facilitating the exchange of protocols and experiences among all of its members.
.
The ISTT, in accordance with its bylaws (Art. 3a. To foster and encourage knowledge generation, discussion, training and education, and the diffusion of the technologies and specific research used for the genetic modification of animals...) is most proud to host the tg-l for the benefit of the entire community of scientists, technicians, students and all others, interested in animal transgenesis.
.
Included in the tg-l membership are active researchers at all levels, from graduate students to full professors, and the technicians, managers, and directors who operate the transgenic core facilities that are largely responsible for producing the transgenic animals used by those researchers. Major keywords cover a wide spectrum of subject areas: homologous recombination, targeted mutagenesis, inducible expression, ES cells, microinjection, mouse genetics, and animal husbandry, to name just a few.
.
The tg-l is public (anyone may subscribe, including ISTT members and non-members alike, but subject to email address verification), unmoderated (messages will not be altered by the list administrator) and closed (only subscribers may post messages). The tg-l currently has about 1800 subscribers from all over the world, interested in animal transgenesis.
.
Subscription to the tg-l is free, automatic and very simple:
go to the transgenic-list subscription page at the ISTT web server
.
Tg-l archives from 1996 to the present are available for simple searches by tg-l subscribers (specific password required)
The tg-l archives are regularly mantained by Llus Montoliu
.
Total number of 23746 messages archived since 1996
Latest message archived dated on: Fri, 29 Jul 2016 19:06:38 +0200
.
The same tg-l archives are available for more complex searches to ISTT Members. If you are not yet a member of the ISTT, you can join the ISTT by visiting this web page
.
Click here for answers to Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) about the tg-l
.
In case of any doubt, question or comment, or if you need your specific password to access the simple tg-l archives,
please contact the tg-l administrators at ISTT using this email address: tglist_admin@transtechsociety.org
.
What topics have been mostly discussed at the transgenic-list?
Word-cloud graphic created with Wordle, using text included in subjects from all messages posted between inception, in 1996, and September 2014. Words that are used more frequently are more prominently represented.
International Society for Transgenic Technologies (ISTT, Inc.), Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA
Tel. +1 (716) 845-5843, Fax. +1 (716) 845-5908, e-mail:
istt@transtechsociety.org
disclaimer - legal notice - webmaster - website map