Recombinant DNA Technology and Transgenic Animals | Learn Science at Scitable
Recombinant DNA Technology and Transgenic Animals
By:Leslie Pray, Ph.D.2008Nature Education
Citation:Pray,L.(2008)Recombinant DNA technology and transgenic animals.Nature Education1(1):51
GloFish are the first transgenic animals available to the American public. But what's the biotechnology behind them?
Aa
Aa
Aa
Figure 1:The multicolored GloFish.Courtesy of www.glofish.com. All rights reserved.
"Seeing
is believing with GloFish. They are absolutely stunning!" The preceding is some
of the marketing material you'd read if you visited the GloFish website
(GloFish, 2008). Beauty may be in the eye of the beholder, but nearly everyone
would agree that these firstand, so far, onlytransgenic animals made available
to the general public in the United States (except in California, pending a formal review of their potential effect on the environment) are a worthy conversation piece. A transgenic, or
genetically modified, organism is one that has been altered through recombinant
DNA technology, which involves either the combining of DNA from different
genomes or the insertion of foreign DNA into a genome. GloFish (Figure 1) are a type of transgenic zebrafish
(Danio rerio) that have been modified
through the insertion of a green fluorescent protein (gfp) gene. Not all GloFish are green, however. Rather, there are
several gfp gene constructs, each
encoding a different colored phenotype, from fluorescent yellow to fluorescent
red.
Currently,
GloFish are the only recombinant-DNA animal that has been approved for human
"use" by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Their approval has raised
important questions about whether, and to what extent, genetically modified animals should be made available to
consumers. But how were scientists able to create these engineered organisms in
the first place? Like so many genetic technologies used today, recombinant DNA
technology had its origins in the late 1960s and early 1970s. By the 1960s,
scientists had already learned that cells repair DNA breaks by reuniting, or
recombining, the broken pieces. Thus, it was only a matter of time before researchers
identified the raw biological ingredients necessary for recombination, figured
out how those ingredients functioned together, and then tried to govern the
recombining process themselves.
Early Experiments Provide the Basis for Recombinant Organisms
Although
recombinant DNA technology first emerged in the 1960s and 1970s, the basic
principle of recombination had been discovered many years earlier. Indeed, in
1928, Frederick Griffith, an English medical officer studying the bacteria
responsible for a pneumonia epidemic in London, first demonstrated what he
termed "genetic transformation"; here, living cells took up genetic material
released by other cells and became phenotypically "transformed" by the new
genetic information. More than a decade later, Oswald Avery repeated Griffith's
work and isolated the transforming molecule, which turned out to be DNA. These
experiments showed that DNA can be transferred from one cell to another in the
laboratory, thus changing the actual genetic phenotype of an organism.
Prior to
these classic experiments, the idea that the genetic material was a specific
chemical that could be modified and transferred into cells was certainly
controversial. But before the explosion in recombinant DNA could begin,
scientists would have to learn not only how to transfer DNA, but also how to
isolate and modify individual genes.
Key Developments in Recombinant DNA Technology
Following
these early experiments, four key developments helped lead to construction of
the first recombinant DNA organism (Kiermer, 2007). The first two developments
revolved around how scientists learned to cut and paste pieces of DNA from
different genomes using enzymes. The latter two events involved the development
of techniques used to transfer foreign DNA into new host cells.
Discovering the Cut-and-Paste Enzymes
Figure 2
The
first major step forward in the ability to chemically modify genes occurred
when American biologist Martin Gellert and his colleagues from the National
Institutes of Health purified and characterized an enzyme in Escherichia coli responsible for the actual
joining, or recombining, of separate pieces of DNA (Zimmerman et al., 1967). They called their find
"DNA-joining enzyme," and this enzyme is now known as DNA ligase. All living
cells use some version of DNA ligase to "glue together" short strands of DNA
during replication. Using E. coli extract, the researchers next showed that only in the
presence of ligase was it possible to repair single-stranded breaks in  phage DNA. (Discovered in 1950
by American microbiologist Esther Lederberg,  phage is a virus particle that
infects E. coli.) More specifically, they
showed that the enzyme was able to form a 3'-5'-phosphodiester bond between the
5'-phosphate end of the last nucleotide on one DNA fragment and the 3'-OH end
of the last nucleotide on an adjacent fragment. The identification of DNA
ligase was the first of several key steps that would eventually empower
scientists to attempt their own recombination experimentsexperiments that
involved not just recombining the DNA of a single individual, but recombining
DNA from different individuals, including different species.
A second
major step forward in gene modification was the discovery of restriction
enzymes, which cleave DNA at specific
sequences. These enzymes were discovered at approximately the same time as the
first DNA ligases by Swiss biologist Werner Arber and his colleagues while they
were investigating a phenomenon called host-controlled restriction of bacteriophages.
Bacteriophages are viruses that invade and often destroy their bacterial host
cells; host-controlled restriction refers to the defense mechanisms that
bacterial cells have evolved to deal with these invading viruses. Arber's team
discovered that one such mechanism is enzymatic activity provided by the host
cell. The team named the responsible enzymes "restriction enzymes" because of
the way they restrict the growth of bacteriophages. These scientists were also the
first to demonstrate that restriction enzymes damage invading bacteriophages by
cleaving the phage DNA at very specific nucleotide sequences (now known as
restriction sites). The identification and characterization of restriction
enzymes gave biologists the means to cut specific pieces of DNA required (or
desired) for subsequent recombination.
Inserting Foreign DNA into a New Host Cell
Although
Griffith and Avery had had demonstrated the ability to transfer foreign genetic
material into cells decades earlier, this "transformation" was very
inefficient, and it involved "natural" rather than manipulated DNA. Only in the
1970s did scientists begin to use vectors to efficiently transfer genes into
bacterial cells. The first such vectors were plasmids, or small DNA molecules
that live naturally inside bacterial cells and replicate separately from a
bacterium's chromosomal DNA.
Plasmids'
utility as a DNA shuttle, or vector, was discovered by Stanford University
biochemist Stanley Cohen. Scientists had already established that some bacteria
had what were known as antibiotic resistance factors, or R factor-plasmids
that replicated independently inside the bacterial cell. But scientists knew
little about how the different R factor genes functioned. Cohen thought that if
there were an experimental system for transforming host bacterial cells with
these R-factor DNA molecules, he and other researchers might be able to better
understand R-factor biology and figure out exactly what it was about these
plasmids that made bacteria antibiotic-resistant. He and his colleagues
developed that system by demonstrating that calcium chloride-treated E. coli can be genetically transformed
into antibiotic-resistant cells by the addition of purified plasmid DNA (in
this case, purified R-factor DNA) to the bacteria during transformation (Cohen et al., 1972).
Recombinant Plasmids in Bacteria
The
following year, Stanley Cohen and his colleagues were also the first to
construct a novel plasmid DNA from two separate plasmid species which, when
introduced into E. coli, possessed
all the nucleotide base sequences and functions of both parent plasmids. Cohen's
team used restriction endonuclease enzymes to cleave the double-stranded DNA
molecules of the two parent plasmids. The team next used DNA ligase to rejoin,
or recombine, the DNA fragments from the two different plasmids (Figure 2). Finally, they introduced the
newly recombined plasmid DNA into E. coli.
The researchers were able to join two DNA fragments from completely different
plasmids because, as they explained, "the nucleotide sequences cleaved are
unique and self-complementary so that DNA fragments produced by one of these
enzymes can associate by hydrogen-bonding with other fragments produced by the
same enzyme" (Cohen et al.,
1973).
Figure 3
Figure Detail
The same
could be said of any DNAnot just plasmidsfrom two different species. This
universalitythe capacity to mix and match DNA from different species, because
DNA has the same structure and function in all species and because restriction
and ligase enzymes cut and paste the same ways in different genomesmakes
recombinant DNA biology possible.
Today, the
E. coli  bacteriophage
is one of the most widely used vectors used to carry recombinant DNA into
bacterial cells. This virus makes an excellent vector because about one-third
of its genome is considered nonessential, meaning that it can be removed and
replaced by foreign DNA (i.e., the DNA being inserted). As illustrated in Figure 3, the nonessential genes are
removed by restriction enzymes (the specific restriction enzyme EcoRI is shown in
the figure), the foreign DNA inserted in their place, and then the final recombinant
DNA molecule is packaged into the virus's protein coat and prepped for
introduction into its host cell.
Vectors Used in Mammalian Cells
A fourth major step
forward in the field of recombinant DNA technology was the discovery of a vector
for efficiently introducing genes into mammalian cells. Specifically,
researchers learned that recombinant DNA could be introduced into the SV40
virus, a pathogen that infects both monkeys and humans. Indeed, in 1972,
Stanford University researcher Paul Berg and his colleagues integrated segments
of  phage DNA, as well as a segment of E.
coli DNA containing the galactose operon, into the SV40 genome. (The E. coli galactose operon is a cluster of
genes that plays a role in galactose sugar metabolism.) The significance of
their achievement was its demonstration that recombinant DNA technologies could
be applied to essentially any DNA sequences, no matter how distantly related
their species of origin. In their words, these researchers "developed
biochemical techniques that are generally applicable for joining covalently any
two DNA molecules" (Jackson et al.,
1972). While the scientists didn't actually introduce foreign DNA into a
mammalian cell in this experiment, they provided (proved) the means to do so.
Recombinant DNA Technology Creates Recombinant Animals
The first actual
recombinant animal cells weren't developed until about a decade after the
research conducted by Berg's team, and most of the early studies involved mouse
cells. In 1981, for example, Franklin Costantini and Elizabeth Lacy of the
University of Oxford introduced rabbit DNA fragments containing the adult
beta globin gene into murine (mouse) germ-line cells (Costantini & Lacy,
1981). (The beta globins are a family of polypeptides that serve as the
subunits of hemoglobin molecules.) Another group of scientists had demonstrated
that foreign genes could be successfully integrated into murine somatic cells,
but this was the first demonstration of their integration into germ cells. In
other words, Costantini and Lacy were the first to engineer an entire
recombinant animal (albeit with relatively low efficiency).
Interestingly, not
long after the publication of his team's 1972 study, Paul Berg led a voluntary
moratorium in the scientific community against certain types of recombinant DNA
research. Clearly, scientists have always been aware that the ability to
manipulate the genome and mix and match genes from different organisms, even
different species, raises immediate and serious questions about the potential
hazards and risks of doing soimplications still being debated today.
Since these early
studies, scientists have used recombinant DNA technologies to create many
different types of recombinant animals, both for scientific study and for the
profitable manufacturing of human proteins. For instance, mice, goats, and cows
have all been engineered to create medically valuable proteins in their milk; moreover,
hormones that were once isolated only in small amounts from human cadavers can
now be mass-produced by genetically engineered cells. In fact, the entire
biotechnology industry is based upon the ability to add new genes to cells,
plants, and animals As scientists discover important new proteins
and genes, these technologies will continue to form the foundation of future
generations of discoveries and medical advances.
References and Recommended Reading
Cohen, S. N., et al. Nonchromosomal
antibiotic resistance in bacteria: Genetic transformation of Escherichia coli by R-factor DNA. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
69, 21102114 (1972)
. Construction
of biologically functional bacterial plasmids in vitro. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 70,
32403244 (1973)
Costantini, F., & Lacy, E. Introduction
of a rabbit beta-globin gene into the mouse germ line. Nature 294, 9294 (1981) (link to article)
Crea, R.,
et al. Chemical synthesis of genes
for human insulin. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 75, 57655769 (1978)
GloFish.
GloFish home page. www.glofish.com (Accessed July 3, 2008)
Jackson,
D. A., et al. Biochemical method for
inserting new genetic information into DNA of simian virus 40: Circular SV40
DNA molecules containing lambda phage genes and the galactose operon of Escherichia coli. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 69, 29042909 (1972)
Kiermer, V. The dawn of recombinant DNA.
Nature Milestones: DNA Technologies, http://www.nature.com/milestones/miledna/full/miledna02.html
(2007) (link to article)
Miller, H. I. FDA on transgenic animalsA
dog's breakfast? Nature Biotechnology
26, 159160 (2008) (link to article)
Zimmerman,
S. B., et al. Enzymatic joining of
DNA strands: A novel reaction of diphosphopyridine nucleotide. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
57, 18411848 (1967)
Outline
|
Keywords
|
Add Content to Group
Article History
Close
Share|Cancel
Revoke|Cancel
Keywords
Keywords for this Article
Add keywords to your Content
Save|Cancel
Flag Inappropriate
The Content is:
Objectionable
Explicit
Offensive
Inaccurate
Comments
Flag Content| Cancel
Close
share
Close
Digg
MySpace
Google+
StumbleUpon
Email your Friend
Your First Name
*
Your Last Name
*
Your Email Address
*
Your Friend's Email address
*
Your Message*
Submit|Cancel
*
Required
Close
This content is currently under construction.
Close
Explore This Subject
Applications in Biotechnology
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs): Transgenic Cropsand Recombinant DNA Technology
Recombinant DNA Technology and Transgenic Animals
Restriction Enzymes
The Biotechnology Revolution: PCR and the Use of Reverse Transcriptase to Clone Expressed Genes
DNA Replication
DNA Damage & Repair:
Mechanisms for Maintaining DNA Integrity
DNA Replication and Causes of Mutation
Genetic Mutation
Genetic Mutation
Major Molecular Events of DNA Replication
Semi-Conservative DNA Replication: Meselson and Stahl
Jumping Genes
Barbara McClintock and the Discovery of Jumping Genes (Transposons)
Functions and Utility of Alu Jumping Genes
Transposons, or Jumping Genes: Not Junk DNA?
Transposons: The Jumping Genes
Transcription & Translation
DNA Transcription
RNA Transcription by RNA Polymerase: Prokaryotes vs Eukaryotes
Translation: DNA to mRNA to Protein
What is a Gene? Colinearity and Transcription Units
Discovery of Genetic Material
Barbara McClintock and the Discovery of Jumping Genes (Transposons)
Discovery of DNA as the Hereditary Material using Streptococcus pneumoniae
Discovery of DNA Structure and Function: Watson and Crick
Isolating Hereditary Material: Frederick Griffith, Oswald Avery, Alfred Hershey, and Martha Chase
Gene Copies
Copy Number Variation
Copy Number Variation and Genetic Disease
Copy Number Variation and Human Disease
DNA Deletion and Duplication and the Associated Genetic Disorders
Tandem Repeats and Morphological Variation
RNA
Chemical Structure of RNA
Eukaryotic Genome Complexity
Genome Packaging in Prokaryotes: the Circular Chromosome of E. coli
RNA Functions
RNA Splicing: Introns, Exons and Spliceosome
RNA Transcription by RNA Polymerase: Prokaryotes vs Eukaryotes
What is a Gene? Colinearity and Transcription Units
Topic rooms within Nucleic Acid Structure and Function
Close
No topic rooms are there.
|
Lead Editor:
Bob Moss
Nucleic Acid Structure and Function
Loading ...
Within this Subject(34)
Applications in Biotechnology(4)
Discovery of Genetic Material(4)
DNA Replication(6)
Gene Copies(5)
Jumping Genes(4)
RNA(7)
Transcription & Translation(4)
OrBrowse Visually
Other Topic Rooms
Genetics
Gene Inheritance and Transmission
Gene Expression and Regulation
Nucleic Acid Structure and Function
Chromosomes and Cytogenetics
Evolutionary Genetics
Population and Quantitative Genetics
Genomics
Genes and Disease
Genetics and Society
Cell Biology
Cell Origins and Metabolism
Proteins and Gene Expression
Subcellular Compartments
Cell Communication
Cell Cycle and Cell Division
Scientific Communication
Career Planning
Loading ...
Student Voices
Creature Cast
NatureEdCast
Simply Science
Green Screen
ConferenceCast
Green Science
Bio 2.0
Viruses101
ScholarCast
The Success Code
Why Science Matters
Earthbound
The Beyond
Plant ChemCast
Pop
SciBytes
Postcards from the Universe
Brain Metrics
Mind Read
Eyes on Environment
Accumulating Glitches
Saltwater Science
Microbe Matters

Prev

Prev
Next

Next

LearnCast
You have authorized LearnCasting of your reading list in Scitable. Do you want to LearnCast this session?
Yes
No
This article has been posted to your Facebook page via Scitable LearnCast.
Close
Change LearnCast Settings
 2014 Nature Education
About|
Contact|
Press Room|
Sponsors|
Terms of Use|
Privacy Notice|
Glossary|
Catalog|
Home|
Library|
People|
Groups|
Blogs
Scitable Chat
Register
|
Sign In
Visual Browse
Close