Vaccine | Define Vaccine at Dictionary.com
Dictionary.com
Word of the
Day
Translate
Games
Blog
Thesaurus.com
Favorites
Dictionary.com
Thesaurus.com
My Account
Log Out
Log In
Try Our Apps
definitions
definitions
synonyms
translations
Follow @dictionarycom
follow Dictionary.com
The Word of the Year is...
Favorite Button
CITE
Translate
Facebook
Share
Twitter
Tweet
Google+
Share
vaccine
[vak-seen or, esp. British, vak-seen, -sin]
/vksin or, esp. British, vk sin, -sn/
Spell
Syllables
Examples
Word Origin
See more synonyms on Thesaurus.com
noun
1.
any preparation used as a preventive inoculation to confer immunity against a specific disease, usually employing an innocuous form of the disease agent, as killed or weakened bacteria or viruses, to stimulate antibody production.
2.
the virus of cowpox, used in vaccination, obtained from pox vesicles of a cow or person.
3.
a software program that helps to protect against computer viruses, as by detecting them and warning the user.
adjective
4.
of or relating to vaccination.
5.
of or relating to vaccinia.
6.
of, relating to, or derived from cows.
Origin of vaccine Expand
< New Latin (variolae) vaccnae cowpox (in title of E. Jenner's treatise of 1798), equivalent to vacc(a) cow + -nae, feminine plural of -nus -ine1
Related forms
Expand
provaccine, adjective
Dictionary.com UnabridgedBased on the Random House Dictionary,  Random House, Inc. 2016.
Cite This Source
Examples from the Web for vaccine
Expand
Contemporary Examples
They will be enrolled into the trial three people at a time with frequent monitoring of the vaccine safety.
Ebola Vaccine Will Do Little for Current Crisis
Kent Sepkowitz
August 27, 2014
The story, briefly, is that, in the late 1990s, a pretty good (not great) vaccine demonstrated a real reduction in Lyme cases.
Thank Anti-Vaxxers for Lyme Disease
Kent Sepkowitz
April 12, 2014
We must be careful not to administer a vaccine against faith to them.
What Pope Francis Can Teach the GOP
Sally Kohn
January 5, 2014
Of course notthe delivery of vaccine from manufacturer to arm is only part of the problem for any vaccination program.
Powdered Measles Vaccine Could Be Huge for Developing World
Kent Sepkowitz
December 1, 2014
The protection offered by the current vaccine also wanes more rapidly than researchers once thought.
Ignore the Fear Mongering: Whooping Cough Vaccine Works
Amanda Schaffer
February 21, 2013
Historical Examples
It is not impossible, since Jenner found the vaccine virus, Pasteur the hydrophobic lymph and now Koch the tubercle lymph.
Prof. Koch's Method to Cure Tuberculosis Popularly Treated
Max Birnbaum
When unsuccessful, the vaccine matter or the technique is faulty.
The Home Medical Library, Volume I (of VI)
Various
As a rule, the propriety of using a vaccine can be determined from the general condition of the patient.
Manual of Surgery
Alexis Thomson and Alexander Miles
Meanwhile the bacteriologists are steadily at work on a vaccine or antitoxin.
Preventable Diseases
Woods Hutchinson
Favourable results have also followed the use of pyocyanase, a vaccine prepared from the bacillus pyocyaneus.
Manual of Surgery
Alexis Thomson and Alexander Miles
British Dictionary definitions for vaccine Expand
vaccine
/vksin/
noun (med)
1.
a suspension of dead, attenuated, or otherwise modified microorganisms (viruses, bacteria, or rickettsiae) for inoculation to produce immunity to a disease by stimulating the production of antibodies
2.
(originally) a preparation of the virus of cowpox taken from infected cows and inoculated in humans to produce immunity to smallpox
3.
(modifier) of or relating to vaccination or vaccinia
4.
(computing) a piece of software designed to detect and remove computer viruses from a system
Word Origin
C18: from New Latin variolae vaccnae cowpox, title of medical treatise (1798) by Edward Jenner, from Latin vacca a cow
Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition  William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986  HarperCollinsPublishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012
Cite This Source
Word Origin and History for vaccine Expand
n.
"matter used in vaccination," 1846, from Latin vaccina, fem. of vaccinus "pertaining to a cow" (see vaccination).
Online Etymology Dictionary,  2010 Douglas Harper
Cite This Source
vaccine in Medicine
Expand
vaccine vaccine (vk-sn' vk'sn')n.
A preparation of a weakened or killed pathogen, such as a bacterium or virus, or of a portion of the pathogen's structure
that upon administration stimulates antibody production against the pathogen but is incapable of causing severe infection.
A vaccine prepared from the cowpox virus and inoculated against smallpox.
The American Heritage Stedman's Medical DictionaryCopyright  2002, 2001, 1995 by Houghton Mifflin Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin Company.
Cite This Source
vaccine in Science
Expand
vaccine
(vk-sn')  A preparation of a weakened or killed pathogen, such as a bacterium or virus, or of a portion of the pathogen's structure, that stimulates immune cells to recognize and attack it, especially through antibody production. Most vaccines are given orally or by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection. See Note at Jenner.Our Living Language: In the 1950s, polio epidemics left thousands of children with permanent physical disabilities. Today, infants are given a vaccine to prevent infection with the polio virus. That vaccine, like most others, works by stimulating the body's immune system to produce antibodies that destroy pathogens. Scientists usually prepare vaccines by taking a sample of the pathogen and destroying or weakening it with heat or chemicals. The inactivated or attenuated pathogen loses its ability to cause serious illness but is still able to stimulate antibody production, thereby conferring immunity. The Salk polio vaccine contains "killed" virus, while the Sabin polio vaccine contains weakened "live" poliovirus. (Many scientists no longer consider viruses to be living organisms) Scientists are also able to change the structure of viruses and bacteria at the molecular level, altering DNA so that the potential of the vaccine to cause disease is decreased. New vaccines containing harmless bits of DNA have also been developed.
The American Heritage Science DictionaryCopyright  2002. Published by Houghton Mifflin. All rights reserved.
Cite This Source
vaccine in Culture
Expand
vaccine [(vak-seen)]A substance prepared from dead or living microorganisms that is introduced into the body through inoculation. The vaccine causes the development of antibodies, which produce immunity to the disease caused by the microorganism.
The American Heritage New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy, Third EditionCopyright  2005 by Houghton Mifflin Company.Published by Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Cite This Source
Word of the Day
Difficulty index for vaccine
Most English speakers likely know this word
Word Value for vaccine
14
18
Scrabble
Words With Friends
Related Words
polio vaccine
acellular vaccine
BCG vaccine
Hib vaccine
Sabin vaccine
Salk vaccine
Nearby words for vaccine
vaccina
vaccinal
vaccinate
vaccination
vaccinator
vaccine
vaccine lymph
vaccine point
vaccinee
vaccinia
vaccinia virus
Rogue Quiz
About
Terms & Privacy
2016 Dictionary.com, LLC.