Influenza (Flu) | Vaccines.gov
Skip Navigation
Home |About|Contact Us
|Email Updates|
Espaol
Search Vaccines.gov
Basics
Safety
Effectiveness
Prevention
Protection
Diseases
Chickenpox (Varicella)
Diphtheria
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hib
(Haemophilis Influenza type b)
HPV
(Human Papillomavirus)
Influenza
(Flu)
Japanese Encephalitis
(JE)
Measles
Meningococcal
Mumps
Pertussis (Whooping Cough)
Pneumococcal
Polio
Rabies
Rotavirus
Rubella (German Measles)
Shingles (Herpes Zoster)
Tetanus (Lockjaw)
Tuberculosis (TB)
Typhoid Fever
Yellow Fever
Who & When
Infants, Children, & Teens birth-18
Child Catch-up
age 4 mos-18
College & Young Adults
age 19-24
Adults
age 19 and older
Seniors age 65 and older
Pregnant
Health Conditions
Getting Vaccinated
What to Expect
Where to Get Vaccinated
How to Pay
Travel
More Info
Glossary
Acronyms and Abbreviations
Guide to Vaccines Websites
Vaccine Information Statements
Vaccine Approvals
How Vaccines Work
Types of Vaccines
Features: News & Video
Free Resources
Home
>
Diseases
>
Influenza
(Flu)
Chickenpox (Varicella)
Diphtheria
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hib
(Haemophilis Influenza type b)
HPV
(Human Papillomavirus)
Influenza
(Flu)
Japanese Encephalitis
(JE)
Measles
Meningococcal
Mumps
Pertussis (Whooping Cough)
Pneumococcal
Polio
Rabies
Rotavirus
Rubella (German Measles)
Shingles (Herpes Zoster)
Tetanus (Lockjaw)
Tuberculosis (TB)
Typhoid Fever
Yellow Fever
Text Size: A A A
Influenza (Flu)
Note: For the 2016-2017 season, CDC recommends use of the flu shot (inactivated influenza vaccine or IIV) and the recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV). The nasal spray flu vaccine (live attenuated influenza vaccine or LAIV) should not be used during 2016-2017. The 2016-2017 influenza vaccination recommendations are now available.
Vaccines to Prevent Influenza (Flu)
Inactivated Flu: Seasonal inactivated influenza vaccine (Spanish ) (PDF - 344KB)
Vaccination & Vaccine Safety
The flu vaccine is available by shot.
Get your flu vaccine as soon as the vaccine is available in your area.
It is especially important to get the vaccine if you, someone you live with, or someone you care for is at high risk of complications from the flu.
Mild side effects such as soreness, headaches, and fever are common side effects of the flu vaccine.
If you experience a severe reaction such as difficulty breathing, hives, or facial swelling, seek medical attention immediately.
Where can I get the Vaccine?
Use the Flu Vaccine Finder to find a flu vaccine location near you this flu season. The 2016-2017 vaccine is now available.
How Effective is the Flu Vaccine?
The flu vaccine is the best protection against the flu this season. Flu vaccination can reduce flu illnesses, doctor visits, and missed work and school due to flu, as well as prevent flu-related hospitalizations and deaths.
When should I get the Vaccine?
Get the vaccine soon after it becomesavailable in your area, ideally by October, to ensure that you are protected before flu season begins. However, as long as flu viruses are circulating, vaccination should continue throughout the flu season. Flu season usually peaks between December and February, but activity can last as late as May. Early immunization is the most effective, but it is not too late to get the vaccine in January or beyond.
How should I get the Vaccine?
There are two different types of flu vaccines, trivalent and quadrivalent.
Trivalent vaccines protect against two influenza A viruses (an H1N1 and an H3N2) and an influenza B virus. Trivalent vaccines are available in:
Standard-dose trivalent shots (IIV3), approved for use in people six months and older. (Most flu shots are given with a needle. One flu vaccine also can be given with a jet injector, for persons 18 through 64 years old).
High dose trivalent shot approved for people 65 years or older.
Recombinant trivalent shot that is egg-free, approved for people 18 years or older.
A trivalent flu shot made with adjuvant (an ingredient of a vaccine that helps create a stronger immune response in the patients body), approved for people 65 years of age and older (new this season).
Quadivalent vaccines protect against two influenza A viruses and two influenza B viruses. Quadrivalent vaccines are approved for different age groups,and include:
An intradermal quadrivalent flu shot, which is injected into the skin instead of the muscle and uses a much smaller needle than the regular flu shot. It is approved for people 18 through 64 years of age.
A quadrivalent flu shot containing virus grown in cell culture, which is approved for people 4 years of age and older (new this season).
How Long is my Flu Vaccination Good for?
A flu vaccine is needed every season for two reasons. First, the bodys immune response from vaccination declines over time, so an annual vaccine is needed for optimal protection. Second, because flu viruses are constantly changing, the formulation of the flu vaccine is reviewed each year and sometimes updated to keep up with changing flu viruses. For the best protection, everyone six months and older should get vaccinated annually.
Does the Flu Vaccine Work Right Away?
It takes about two weeks after vaccination for antibodies to develop in the body and provide protection against influenza virus infection. In the meantime, you are still at risk for getting the flu. That's why it's better to get vaccinated early in the fall, so you are protected before flu begins spreading in your community.
Is the Vaccine Safe?
Seasonal flu vaccines have a very good safety track record. Although there are possible side effects to vaccination, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration closely monitor the safety of seasonal flu vaccines.
Should I get the Flu Vaccine if Im not Feeling Well?
If you are sick with a fever, you should wait until your fever is gone before getting a flu shot. However, you can get a flu shot if you have a respiratory illness without a fever, or if you have another mild illness.
Are there Side Effects?
There are different side effects that may be associated with getting the vaccine. Possible mild side effects include:
Soreness, redness, and swelling at the injection site
Fainting, mainly in adolescents
Aches
Fever (low grade)
Nausea
Serious side effects usually begin within a few minutes to a few hours after receiving the shot. Possible serious side effects of vaccination include:
Difficulty breathing
Hoarseness
Swelling around the eyes or lips
Hives
Paleness
Weakness
Racing heart
Dizziness
Behavior changes
High fever
If you experience any of these reactions, seek medical attention immediately.
How can I Report a Serious Reaction to the Vaccine?
Contact your health care provider immediately if you have a serious reaction to the flu vaccine. Your health care provider should report your reaction to theVaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). You can alsofile a report yourself. All serious reactions should be reported, even if you arent sure it was caused by the flu vaccine. VAERS uses this data to help identify serious reactions that may need further investigation.
If your reaction results in a serious injury, you may qualify for compensation from the Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP). VICP provides compensation for vaccine-related injury or death claims forcovered vaccinesgiven on or after October 1, 1988.
Can I get the Flu from the Vaccine?
No,you cannot get the flu from the flu vaccine. The flu vaccine contains eitherinactivated (killed) flu viruses that cannot cause illness or no flu viruses at all.The most common side effects from the flu vaccine are soreness, redness, tenderness or swelling where the shot was given.A low-grade fever, headache and muscles aches may also occur.
Will I Need to Pay for the Vaccine?
Most health insurance plans cover the cost of vaccines, but you should check with your insurance company before visiting your health care provider. Under theAffordable Care Act, many insurers are required to cover certain preventive services, like the flu vaccine, at no cost to you.
If you do not have insurance or if it does not cover vaccines,help is available.
Is there anyone who should not get the Vaccine?
Talk to your health care provider about vaccination if you have:
A severe allergy to chicken eggs or any of the ingredients in the vaccine.
A history of severe reaction to a flu vaccination.
A moderate-to-severe illness with a fever (you should wait until you are better to get the vaccine).
Some people with a history ofGuillainBarr Syndrome(a severe paralytic illness, also called GBS) should not get this vaccine. Talk to your doctor about your GBS history.
Related Links
Vaccine Effectiveness  How Well Does the Flu Vaccine Work?
Misconceptions about Seasonal Influenza and Influenza Vaccines
Community Immunity (Herd Immunity)
Glossary of Terms
denotes glossary term in text
Influenza: A highly contagious viral infection characterized by sudden onset of fever, severe aches and pains, and inflammation of the mucous membrane.
Virus: A tiny organism that multiplies within cells and causes disease such as chickenpox, measles, mumps, rubella, pertussis and hepatitis. Viruses are not affected by antibiotics, the drugs used to kill bacteria.
Visit the full glossary
Vaccine acronyms and abbreviations
Vaccine Terms A-Z
Visit the full glossaryVaccine acronyms and abbreviations
When Should You Be Vaccinated?
Choose your age group...Infants, Children and TeensChild Catch-Up 4 months-18College & Young Adults 18-24Adults 19+Seniors 65+PregnantHealth Conditions
Did You Know?
Globally, vaccination saves two to three million lives per year.
A federal government Website managed by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
200 Independence Avenue, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20201
Site Map
Home
Basics
Diseases
Who and When
Travel
Getting Vaccinated
More Info
Glossary
Our Partners
Related Websites
AIDS.gov
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA)
CDC Vaccines
Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program
Flu.gov
Healthcare.gov
Healthfinder.gov
Milvax
National Vaccine Program Office (NVPO)
National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
Veterans' Affairs
Additional Information
About Vaccines.gov
Privacy Policy
Accessibility
Disclaimers
Contact Us
Viewers & Players
Give Feedback