Genetically modified organism
A genetically modified organism (GMO) is an organism whose genetic material has been altered using techniques in genetics generally known as recombinant DNA technology.

Recombinant DNA technology is the ability to combine DNA molecules from different sources into the one molecule.

Note:   The above text is excerpted from the Wikipedia article "Genetically modified organism", which has been released under the GNU Free Documentation License.
For more information, see the following related content on ScienceDaily:
Related Stories 
Consumer Knowledge Gap on Genetically Modified Food
May 25, 2016 — While consumers are aware of genetically modified crops and food, their knowledge level is limited and often at odds with the facts, according to a newly published ... read more 

Regulating Genome-Edited Crops That (According to Current Regulations) Aren't GMOs
Feb. 25, 2015 — A survey of rice, wheat, barley, fruit, and vegetable crops found that most mutants created by advanced genetic engineering techniques may be out of the scope of current genetically modified organism ... read more 
Fight Between Genetically Modified Organisms And The Bugs They Repel May Not Be Over
Sep. 3, 2001 — For all the promise of crops genetically modified to resist pests, the miracles of the laboratory are only good until the bugs outsmart them. Mark Whalon, a Michigan State University entomology ... read more 
Research Revisiting the Safety of GM Weevil-Resistant Peas in Mice Contradicts Previous Risk Assessment Findings
Jan. 10, 2013 — Researchers have conducted feeding trials with mice to investigate the allergenicity of genetically modified (GM) weevil-resistant peas. Development of the peas was discontinued in 2005 when a risk ... read more 
New Technique For Modifying Plant Genes Developed
May 4, 2009 — Researchers have used a genome engineering tool they developed to make a model crop plant herbicide-resistant without significant changes to its DNA. The new tool could help provide sustainable food, ... read more 
Gene Barrier In Corn May Boost Trade, Environment
Oct. 12, 2000 — Working with teosinte, a wild cousin of maize, a University of Wisconsin-Madison scientist has found a molecular barrier that, bred into modern hybrid corn, is capable of completely locking out ... read more 

Robust Methods for GMO Detection Ready at Hand
Nov. 10, 2010 — A new Reference Report lists 79 reference methods for GMO analysis which have been validated according to international standards. This Compendium presents the technical state of the art in GMO ... read more 
Rutgers Scientists Create High-Protein Corn With Third World Potential
June 5, 2002 — Rutgers geneticists have devised a new approach to create a more nutritious corn without employing the controversial biotechnology used in genetically modified foods. Instead of adding foreign DNA to ... read more 
DNA Sequences in GMOs: Largest Database Now Publicly Available
Nov. 26, 2015 — The JRC has published a new database, JRC GMO-Amplicons, which contains more than 240 000 DNA sequences appearing in genetically modified organisms (GMOs). It will help to verify the presence of ... read more 
GMO Soybean Pollen Threatens Mexican Honey Sales, Report Finds
Feb. 7, 2014 — Researchers have helped rural 