Genetic Engineering
Skip to main content
Organic Consumers AssociationCampaigning for health, justice, sustainability, peace, and democracy
HOME
BLOG
TOPICSAll About OrganicsSave Organic Standards
Bodycare
Clothes
Biodynamics
The Myth of Natural
Environment & ClimateCAFOs vs. Free Range
Organic Transitions
Fair Trade & Social JusticeBuy Local Movement
Farm IssuesHoney Bees
NAIS
Food SafetyUSDA Watch
Toxic Sludge
Raw Milk
Mad Cow
Irradiation
Genetic EngineeringrBGH
Millions Against Monsanto
Cloning & Patenting
Nanotechnology
GE Wheat
Health IssuesSwine & Bird Flu
Children's Health
Politics & Globalization
CAMPAIGNSCook Organic not the Planet
Millions Against Monsanto
Save the Bees
Safeguard Organic Standards
Clothes for a Change
Organic Transitions
Protest Starbucks
Mad Cow USA
Coming Clean
Breaking the Chains
USDA Watch
Healthy Raw Milk
Stop Toxic Sludge
Planting Peace
Appetite for a Change
Campaign Materials
MEDIAContact
Press Releases
Articles/Essays
Newsletter
OCA In the News
Action Alerts
ABOUTAbout OCA
Contact
Staff
Organic Consumers Fund
PROJECTSVa Orgnica
Fair World Project
Organic Retail & Consumer Alliance
Regeneration International
DONATEDonate Online Now
Other Ways to Donate
EVENTS
Genetic Engineering
What you need to know
rBGH
Millions Against Monsanto
Cloning & Patenting
Nanotechnology
GE Wheat
HomeTOPICSGenetic Engineering
GMO = Genetically ModifiedOrganism
GMOs are created in a lab, by inserting a gene from one organism into another unrelated organism, producing plants and animals that would never occur in nature. No long-term safety studies have been done on humans, but animal studies link the consumption of GMOs to an increase in allergies, kidney and liver disease, ADHD, cancer, infertility, chronic immune disorders and more.
DSC_0531.jpg
tomatos-oca320.jpg
two-cows-oca-3568.jpg
corn-growing-oca-7029.jpg
salmon-oca-0429.jpg
wheat-painting-oca1363.jpg
potatos-oca-1385.jpg
CloudField-Edit.jpg
farn-oca-2454-Edit.jpg
FMXfield5 (1).jpg
grain-2751.jpg
wheat-painting-oca1362.jpg
grains-oca-2748.jpg
hands-oca-1365.jpg
heritage-corn-oca-2742.jpg
picnic-oca-1813.jpg
squash-oca-2692.jpg
boston-milk-protest1.jpg
The GMO Food Venture Is Built on a Foundation of Mass Deception
News
August 23, 2016
The Ecologist
by Steven M. Druker
dna 1000x667
The very first GE product, a dietary supplement, poisoned thousands of people of which dozens died, writes Steven M. Druker. The first GE food, the 'Flavr Savr' tomato, caused stomach lesions. But a long campaign of concealment and deception by regulators and corporate scientists re-engineered the truth to present GMOs as so safe they did not even need to be tested for safety. Read more
Smuckers: Produce Non-GMO and Organic Peanut Butter and Jelly; Stop Jamming Americans Full of GMOs
News
August 26, 2016
Santa Monica Observer
by Natalie Watson
peanutbutterjelly 1000x667.jpg
Today, Green America's GMO Inside campaign launched a major push - "Smucker's: Make PB&J Great Again" - to get The J.M. Smucker Company, America's iconic producer of Smucker's jams, jellies, and Jif peanut butter, to phase out the use of genetically engineered ingredients (GMOs) and transition towards organic products. Read more
Crusade or Charade: What's Really Motivating Efforts to Mandate GMO-Labeling?
News
August 26, 2016
Forbes
by Glenn G. Lammi
corn 1000x667
Because public-interest groups cloak themselves with the feel-good mantle of protecting consumers, the environment, animals, etc., the motives of such groups rarely get questioned. But several recent developments show that all too often, activists put their own self-interest before the publics interest. Read more
Italian Health Ministry Puts Strict Restrictions on Glyphosate Herbicides
News
August 26, 2016
Sustainable Pulse
Colosseum 1000x667
NGOs across Europe have enthusiastically applauded the decision by Italys Ministry of Health on Friday to place a number of restrictions on the use of the probable carcinogen Glyphosate, one of the worlds most ubiquitous pesticides. Read more
Exclusive: Monsanto Pulls New GM Cotton Seed from India in Protest
News
August 25, 2016
Reuters
by Mayank Bhardwaj
india flag 1000x667
Monsanto Co has withdrawn an application seeking approval for its next generation of genetically modified cotton seeds in India, a major escalation in a long-running dispute between New Delhi and the world's biggest seed maker. Read more
How Monsanto Promotes Worldwide Infertility
News
August 24, 2016
Mercola
by Dr. Joseph Mercola
prego 1000x667
Monsanto has a long and infamous history of manufacturing and bringing to market such chemicals as DDT, Agent Orange, aspartame, Roundup and dioxin  chemical compounds from which society continues to feel the effects. Read more
How the GE Food Venture Has Been Chronically Dependent on Deception
News
August 21, 2016
Independent Science News
by Steven M. Druker, J.D.
crossed fingers liar deceit cc 420x280.jpg
Although it purports to be based on solid science and the open flow of information on which science depends, the massive venture to reconfigure the genetic core of the worlds food supply has substantially relied on the propagation of falsehoods. Its advancement and very survival have been crucially and chronically dependent on the misrepresentation of reality  to the extent that more than thirty years after the creation of the first genetically engineered plant, the vast majority of people the world-over (including most government officials, journalists, and even scientists) continue to
Read more
There's a Difference between Buying Organic and Not Buying GMOs
News
August 18, 2016
Alternet
by Jane Lear
sunflower seeds 1000x667
You never know where the snatches of conversation overheard at farm stands or farmers markets will lead youinto an impromptu recipe exchange, for instance, or the desire to try a new vegetable (or part of one, like beet greens). The dark side of this eavesdropping is that you will hear culinary myths being perpetuated left, right, and center. Read more
California University Sued for failing to Release Public Records on GMOs and Pesticides
News
August 21, 2016
Sustainable Pulse
uc davis 1000x667
Consumer group U.S. Right to Know filed a lawsuit late Wednesday to compel the University of California, Davis to comply with requests for public records related to the universitys work on genetically engineered food, pesticides and its relationship with the agrichemical industry. Read more
Anti-Science Claims Shadow Stein
News
August 21, 2016
Georgia World
Jill Stein 750x500
Green Party presidential nominee Jill Stein has been waging an uphill battle for name recognition as she pursues her White House bid. Read more
Page 1
for Genetic Engineering
Alerts
We Can Still STOP the DARK Act!
President Obama: Pledge to Veto the DARK Act!
Monsanto Wins 1st Senate Vote on Roberts-Stabenow DARK Act!
Monsanto Wins 1st Senate Vote on Roberts-Stabenow DARK Act!
Don't let Monsanto & Corrupt Corporate Organic Kill GMO Labeling

Scientific Studies
Twenty Years
of Failure: Why GM Crops Have Failed to Deliver on Their Promises
Lost in the Mist: How Glyphosate Use Disoportionately Threatens Californias Most Impoverished Counties
New Study Shows Roundup Herbicide Causes Antibiotic Resistance in Bacteria
Gerber Lil Crunchies Veggie Dip Toddler Snack Full of Insecticidal GMOs
Roundup Herbicide Is Endocrine Disruptor in Human Cells at Drinking Water Levels
View all scientific studies
Videos
Satyagraha for Gandhi's Ghani
Satyagraha for Gandhi's Ghani
Seeds of Freedom
Seeds of Freedom
Genetic engineering: The world's greatest scam?
Genetic engineering: The world's greatest scam?
GMO Myths and Truths
GMO Myths and Truths
Daniel Bissonnette, at March against Monsanto, Vancouver
Daniel Bissonnette, at March against Monsanto, Vancouver
GMO A Go Go! - English
GMO A Go Go! - English
What is Genetically Modified Food?
What is Genetically Modified Food?
Downloads
OCA's GMO Labeling Petition
What Are GMOs?
Leaflet
GMO? NO!
Leaflet
Non-GMO Shopping Guide by The Institute for Responsible Technology
SUBSCRIBE
Receive Organic Bytes, OCA's weekly email newsletter
Your Information
Email *
Join our Mobile Network
Text JoinOCA to 97779
Donate
Cool The Planet.Feed The World.A project of OCA
Buying Guide
Green Buying directories for finding organic food, local food,natural and holistic products.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
Beyond GM: Our Food, Our Future
Buycott App: Demand GMO Labeling Campaign
GM Watch
Institute for Responsible Technology
Friends of the Earth
FDA Xenotransplantation Site
Campaign for Responsible Transplantation
Action BioScience
Public Patent Foundation - Representing the public's interest in the patent system
Genetic Crossroads Newsletter - Center for Genetics and Society
Get Local
Find News and Action for your state:
Select your state
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District Of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Canada
Mexico
Copyright2016 OrganicConsumersAssociation  6771SouthSilverHillDrive, FinlandMN55603ActivistorMediaInquiries: 2182264164  Fax:2183537652  ContactUsPlease support our work: Send a tax-deductible donation to the OCAFair Use Notice: The material on this site is provided for educational and informational purposes. It may contain copyrighted material the use of which has not always been specifically authorized by the copyright owner. It is being made available in an effort to advance the understanding of scientific, environmental, economic, social justice and human rights issues etc. It is believed that this constitutes a 'fair use' of any such copyrighted material as provided for in section 107 of the US Copyright Law. In accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, the material on this site is distributed without profit to those who have an interest in using the included information for research and educational purposes. If you wish to use copyrighted material from this site for purposes of your own that go beyond 'fair use', you must obtain permission from the copyright owner. The information on this site does not constitute legal or technical advice.