GMOS in Food - Consumer Reports
Product Reviews
Issues That Matter
About Us
Sign In
Subscribe
Donate
Buy Digital Subscription
Buy Magazine Subscription
Manage My Account
Sign Out
Sign in
Subscribe
Buy Digital
Subscription
Buy Magazine
Subscription
Search
All Products A-Z
All Product Review
Product
Reviews
Issues that Matter
About Us
Donate
Sign In
Subscribe
Facebook
Twitter
Youtube
Instagram
More
Google
Plus
Pinterest
Cars
Electronics
Appliances
Home & Garden
Babies & Kids
Money
Health
News
Facebook
Twitter
Youtube
Instagram
More
Google
Plus
Pinterest
New Cars
Used Cars
Car Buying & Pricing
Maintenance & Repair
Car Safety
Fuel economy
Reliability & Satisfaction
See Ratings, Reliability & Recommended
Convertibles
Hybrids/EVs
Luxury cars
Minivans
Pickup trucks
Sedans
Small cars
Sports cars
SUVs
Wagons
Tires & Car Accessories
Car batteries
Car seats
Car wax
GPS
Jump starters
Tire pressure gauges
Tires
Wiper blades
Buy a Car
New Cars
Used Cars
All Cars
Cars News
Audio & video
Blu-ray players
Camcorders
Headphones
Sound bars
Streaming media players & services
TVs
Video-game consoles
Wireless speakers
Computers & Internet
Computers
Computer backup systems
Computer monitors
Printers
Security software
Tablets
Telecom services
Wireless routers
Digital cameras & photography
Digital cameras
Phones & mobile devices
Cell phones & services
Cordless phones
E-book readers
Fitness trackers
GPS
Mobile security software
Smartwatches
Supplies & accessories
Batteries
All Electronics
Electronics News
Heating, cooling & air
Air conditioners
Air purifiers
Central air conditioning
Dehumidifiers
Gas furnaces
Humidifiers
Space heaters
Thermostats
Water heaters
Kitchen appliances
Blenders
Coffee makers
Cooktops & wall ovens
Dishwashers
Food processors & choppers
Freezers
Garbage disposers
Hot plates
Juicers
Meat thermometers
Microwave ovens
Mixers
Ranges
Range hoods
Refrigerators
Refrigerator thermometers
Slow cookers
Toasters
Wine chillers
Laundry & cleaning
All-purpose cleaners
Carpet cleaners
Carpet stain removers
Clothes dryers
Dishwasher detergents
Garbage bags
Laundry detergents
Paper towels
Sewing machines
Steam irons
Steam mops
Toilet-bowl cleaners
Vacuum cleaners
Washing machines
Wet/dry vacuums
All Appliances
Appliances News
Bed & bath
Mattresses
Pillows
Sheets
Showerheads
Toilets
Toilet paper
Home improvement
CO & smoke alarms
Countertops
Decking
Door locks
Entry doors
Faucets
Fire extinguishers
Flooring
Generators
Glues
Home windows
Ladders
Lead test kits
Lightbulbs
Paints
Radon test kits
Roofing
Siding
Sinks
Wood stains
Kitchen
Kitchen cabinets
Kitchen cookware
Kitchen knives
Water filters
Lawn & garden
Gas grills
Tools & power equipment
Chain saws
Cordless drills & tool kits
Lawn mowers & tractors
Leaf blowers
Pressure washers
Snow blowers
String trimmers
All Home & garden
Home & garden News
Babies & toddlers
Baby activity centers
Baby bathtubs
Baby bottles
Baby carriers
Baby clothes
Baby food
Baby formulas
Baby jumpers
Baby monitors
Baby swings
Baby walkers
Backpack carriers
Bassinets
Bike trailers
Bouncer seats
Breast pumps
Car seats
Changing tables
Cribs
Crib bedding
Crib mattresses
Diapers
Diaper bags
Diaper pails
Gliders & rocking chairs
High chairs
Nursing bras
Pacifiers
Play yards
Safety gates
Shopping cart covers
Strollers
Children's health
Thermometers
School-age kids
Backpacks
All Babies & kids
Babies & kids News
Banking & credit
Banks & credit unions
Credit cards
Prepaid cards
Rewards cards
Store credit cards
Insurance
Car insurance
Homeowners insurance
Personal finance
Investment companies
Shopping
Appliance stores
Customer service
Electronics stores
Extended warranties
Eyeglass stores
Outlet malls
Pharmacies
Retail stores
Shopping websites
Sporting goods stores
Supermarkets
Travel
Airline travel
Hotel rooms
Luggage
All Money
Money News
Health & Wellness
Vitamins & Supplements
Drugs
Conditions & Treatments
Doctors & Hospitals
Insurance
Find Hospital Ratings
Best Buy Drugs
Exercise & Fitness
Bike helmets
Diet plans
Elliptical exercisers
Exercise bikes
Pedometers
Rowing machines
Treadmills
Home Medical Products
Blood glucose meters
Blood pressure monitors
Heart-rate monitors
Food & Nutrition
Bacon
Beer
Breakfast sandwiches
Cereals
Chocolates
Coffee
Fast food restaurants
Frozen pizza
Frozen waffles
Guacamole
Healthy snacks
Ice creams & frozen yogurts
Popcorn
Salad dressings
Soups & broths
Spiral hams
Yogurt
Personal Care Products
Electric razors
Facial tissues
Insect repellent
Scales
Sunscreens
All Health
Health News
End Surprise Medical Bills
End Robocalls
Guide to the Volkswagen Emissions Recall
What You Need to Know About GMO Labeling
The Rise of Superbugs
View
All
Sign In
Hint: Your username could be your e-mail address
Forgot Username or
Password?
Remember Me
Sign In
Magazine Subscribers Access My Account
Here
Don't have an account? Subscribe now
Need help?
If you need further assistance, please call Customer Service at 1-800-234-1645
Where GMOs hide in your food
Subscribers onlySign in or Subscribe now!
Sign In
E-mail address/Username
Password
Remember Me
Forgot username?
Forgot password?
Close
Send this info to a friend
To:
From :
Check this box if you wish to have a copy mailed to you.
Privacy note: We won't use your friend's e-mail for anything other than sending this message. See our
privacy policy.
A
A
Where GMOs hide in your food
New Consumer Reports tests find genetically modified organisms in many packaged foodsincluding those labeled 'natural'
Published: October 2014
More than 70 percent of Americans say they dont want genetically modified organisms in their food, according to a recent Consumer Reports National Research Center survey of 1,000 adults. The trouble is, its hard to avoid them. Consumer Reports tests of breakfast cereals, chips, soy infant formulas, and other popular products found that GMOs lurk in many packaged foodsincluding some that carry labels suggesting that they dont have these controversial ingredients.
In more than 60 countries, manufacturers must label foods that contain genetically modified ingredients. But GMO labeling isnt required in the U.S. Yet our survey found that 92 percent of Americans wantgenetically modified foods to be labeled. And concerns about the potential health and environmental risks of GMOs coupled with an unwillingness on the part of the federal government to mandate labeling are leading many states to take action on their own.
Vermont recently passed legislation requiring GMO labeling, and similar actions are being considered in more than two dozen other states, including Colorado and Oregon, where residents will begin voting on a GMO-labeling ballot initiative in late October. Federal law already requires labeling that lets consumers know whether foods have been previously frozen, made from concentrate, pasteurized, or irradiated, and we believe the label should also say if food is genetically engineered, says Jean Halloran, director of Food Policy Initiatives at Consumers Union, the policy arm of Consumer Reports.
What are GMOs, anyway?
Genetically modified organisms are created by deliberately changing the genetic makeup of a plant or animal in ways that could never occur in nature. The majority of GMO crops currently on the market have been genetically engineered to produce their own pesticides and/or withstand herbicides that normally would kill them. Farmers use the herbicides to control weeds.
Safety concerns
You may be surprised to know that the federal government has not mandated that genetically modified organisms be proved safe before they're used in your food. But safety assessments are mandatory in other major developed countries, including China, Japan, and the countries of the European Union. Some animal studies suggest that GMOs may cause damage to the immune system, liver, and kidneys.There hasnt been enough research to determine whether GMOs are harmful to people, says Michael Hansen, Ph.D., senior scientist at Consumers Union and an authority on genetic engineering. But scientists around the world agree that GMOs have the potential to introduce allergens and create other unintended changes that may affect health.
The use of genetically modified seeds has steadily grown over the last two decades. That has led to about a 10-fold increase in farmers use of glyphosate, a weedkiller better known as Roundup, which is made by Monsantoa company that also produces genetically modified seedsbecause the herbicide wont harm their GMO crops. But that in turn has created a new problem for farmers to battle:a rising number of superweeds that have now become immune to glyphosate. This defeats one of the major reasons why GMOs were introduced in the first place, Hansen says.
The food industrys take
Companies that produce genetically modified organisms and their allies in the food industry argue that genetic engineering is just an extension of traditional breeding, which humans have been doing for thousands of years. But that process involves the transfer of DNA between closely related plants or animals. Genetic engineering techniques, on the other hand, move genetic material from any organism to any other organism.
There is fierce opposition to GMO labeling from many seed manufacturers and big food companies, which have spent nearly $70 million in California and Washington state alone to defeat GMO-labeling ballot initiatives. One of the major arguments they make is that stamping foods with a statement such as contains GMO ingredients implies that those foods are inferior to other conventional or organic foods when theres no evidence thatgenetically modified organisms are harmful. Our position is that GMO foods should be labeled, period," Halloran says. "Consumers have the right to know whats in their food so that they can make informed choices." (Learn what you can do to support mandatory GMO labeling.)
GMOs are found in surprising places
GMO labeling should be required in the U.S., but in the meantime some food manufacturers are choosing not to usegenetically modified ingredients and are noting that on their products' packaging. To see how many foods have GMOs and whether you can trust the claims you see on food packages, we bought more than 80 different processed foods containing corn or soy between April and July 2014. (Corn and soy are the two most widely grown genetically engineered crops in the U.S.) We tested at least two samples of each product, each sample from a different lot, to measure the GMO content. Then we compared our results with any non-GMO-related claims.
Find a list of all the products we tested in our full report.
Genetically modified corn and soy are used in a wide variety of foods. Nearly all of the samples we tested of the products that did not make any non-GMO-related claim on the package did, in fact, contain substantial amounts ofgenetically modified corn or soy. They included many familiar foods, such as Kelloggs Froot Loops, General Mills Corn Chex, Jiffy Corn Muffin Mix, Doritos Oven Baked Nacho Cheese chips, and Boca Original Vegan Veggie Burgers. Four of the products in this group were soy-based infant formulas: Enfamil ProSobee Soy Infant Formula, Gerber Good Start Soy, Similac Soy Isomil, and Similac Go & Grow Soy Infant formula.
Because our tests represented only a small slice of the market, we cant draw conclusions about all products containing corn or soy, or about every product for a given brand. But untilgenetically modified organism labeling becomes mandatory, our test results can help you decode the meaning behind the claims you see on grocery store shelves.
Photo:
Courtesy
Organic claims
This indicates that a third party has certified that the product complies with USDA Organic guidelines, which forbid the use of genetically modified organisms. Our tests found that products with organic ingredientssuch as Amys All American Veggie Burgers, 365 Everyday Value Organic Corn Tortillas, and Soy Dream Vanilla Frozen Dessertqualified as non-GMO. Many of the products that make organic claims also make some kind of non-GMO claim on their packaging.
Photo:
Courtesy
Non-GMO Project Verified seal
All of the products we tested with this seal qualified as non-GMO. That means the product had no more than 0.9 percent genetically modified organisms. (In EU countries, products that have ingredients that contain more than 0.9 percentgenetically modified organisms are required by law to carry GMO labeling.) The Non-GMO Project certifies manufacturers' products through third-party testing. Among the products we tested that carried this seal were Post Grape Nuts Original cereal and Silk Original soymilk.
Uncertified non-GMO claims
These claims made by the manufacturerwhich may include the words "No GMO" and "Non-GMO"have no standard definition and dont require independent verification. Even so, most of the products we tested containing nonorganic corn or soy that made an uncertified claim met non-GMO standards. These included Clif Builders Chocolate Peanut Butter Bar and Bobs Red Mill Golden Corn Flour.
The exception was Xochitl Totopos de Maiz original corn chips. The package read No GMO and All Natural. But our tests showed that the amount of genetically modified corn in the six samples we tested averaged more than 75 percent. The manufacturer said it uses corn from a supplier that provided test results with many of the deliveries Xochitl received indicating that the corn was non-GMO. When we tested samples from two packages of Xochitl Totopos de Maiz Organic White Corn Chips, which were also labeled "No GMO," we found that the product met non-GMO standards.
Natural claims
More than 60 percent of people in our national survey said they believed that Natural means No GMOs. But thats not what our tests found. Virtually all of the samples we tested of products that made only a "Natural" claim did have a substantial amount of GMOs, although since we did our testing some manufacturers have removed the "natural" claim or have become Non-GMO Project Verified.
The confusing nature of this claim is just one reason we are asking the government to ban the use of 'natural' labels on food, says Urvashi Rangan, Ph.D., director of the safety and sustainability center at Consumer Reports.
Andrea Rock
Take action
If youre in favor of genetically modified organism labeling efforts and you live in Oregon or Colorado, your vote this fall obviously can communicate that message. Those who live elsewhere can contact their state legislators to express their support for mandatory labeling. This is especially important if you live in one of the more than 30 states that have legislation pending on this issue.You also can contact your Congressional representatives in Washington, D.C., to urge them to support the Genetically Engineered Food Right to Know Act, a federal bill calling for mandatory labeling that has been introduced by Sen. Barbara Boxer (D-California) and Rep. Peter DeFazio (D-Oregon). And for more information on GMO food and updates on labeling, go to NotinMyFood.org.
E-mail Newsletters
FREE e-mail Newsletters!Choose from cars, safety, health, and more!
Already signed-up?Manage your newsletters here too.
Health News
Cars
Build & Buy Car Buying Service
Save thousands off MSRP with upfront dealer pricing information and a transparent car buying experience.
See your savings
Mobile
Get Ratings on the go and compare while you shop
Learn more
Consumer Support
My AccountCustomer CareReport a Safety ProblemCareer Opportunities
About Us
Donate
Our Site
A-Z IndexProduct IndexCar IndexVideo Index
Site FeaturesCanada Extraen EspaolPress RoomNewsletters
Products & Services
Buy a Car:
New Cars
Used Cars
Books & MagazinesMobile AppsNational Car Prices
Our Network
Consumers UnionConsumeristConsumer Health Choices
View Recent & Past Issues
Facebook
Twitter
Youtube
Instagram
More
Google
Plus
Pinterest
 2006 - 2016 Consumer Reports
Privacy Policy /
User Agreement /
Ad
Choices
Logout
Sign in
Subscribe
About Us
Donate
Help
Career Opportunities
Facebook
Twitter
Youtube
Instagram
More
Google
Plus
Pinterest
 2006 - 2016 Consumer Reports
Privacy Policy /
User Agreement /
Ad
Choices