Genetically modified organism | Define Genetically modified organism at Dictionary.com
Dictionary.com
Word of the
Day
Translate
Games
Blog
Thesaurus.com
Favorites
Dictionary.com
Thesaurus.com
My Account
Log Out
Log In
Try Our Apps
definitions
definitions
synonyms
translations
Follow @dictionarycom
follow Dictionary.com
Is irregardless a word?
Favorite Button
CITE
Translate
Facebook
Share
Twitter
Tweet
Google+
Share
GMO
noun
1.
genetically modified organism: an organism or microorganism whose genetic material has been altered by means of genetic engineering.
Dictionary.com UnabridgedBased on the Random House Dictionary,  Random House, Inc. 2016.
Cite This Source
British Dictionary definitions for genetically modified organism Expand
GMO
abbreviation
1.
genetically modified organism
Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition  William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986  HarperCollinsPublishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012
Cite This Source
genetically modified organism in Science
Expand
genetically modified organism
(j-nt'-k-l)  An organism whose genetic characteristics have been altered using the techniques of genetic engineering.Our Living Language: Scientists today have the ability to modify the genetic makeup of plants and animals, and even to transfer genes from one species to another. Not since nuclear power has a technology been so controversial, with opponents concerned about the creation of so-called Frankenfoods and proponents promising a better tomorrow through science. The term genetically modified organism (GMO) is used to refer to any microorganism, plant, or animal in which genetic engineering techniques have been used to introduce, remove, or modify specific parts of its genome. Examples include plants being modified for pest resistance; lab animals being manipulated to exhibit human diseases, such as sickle cell anemia; and even glowing jellyfish genes inserted in a rabbit for an art piece. GMOs show great promise in improving agriculture. Plants could be engineered to better tolerate temperature or weather extremes, to contain various vitamins, or to dispense medicines and vaccines. Many think genetically modified foods have the potential to end world hunger. On the other hand, there are fears that the disease- or pest-resistant genes inserted into crop plants might escape into other plants, creating hard-to-control superweeds. There is also the possibility of unexpected effects on other flora and fauna, the risk of agriculture being controlled by biotech companies, and, as with any new technology, problems that are yet unknown.
GMO Abbreviation of genetically modified organism
The American Heritage Science DictionaryCopyright  2002. Published by Houghton Mifflin. All rights reserved.
Cite This Source
genetically modified organism in Culture
Expand
genetically modified organism definitionSee GMO.
GMO definitionThe abbreviation for genetically modified organism. A GMO is an organism whose genome has been altered by the techniques of genetic engineering so that its DNA contains one or more genes not normally found there.Note: A high percentage of food crops, such as corn and soybeans, are genetically modified.
The American Heritage New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy, Third EditionCopyright  2005 by Houghton Mifflin Company.Published by Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Cite This Source
Related Abbreviations for genetically modified organism Expand
GMO
genetically modified organism
The American Heritage Abbreviations Dictionary, Third EditionCopyright  2005 by Houghton Mifflin Company.Published by Houghton Mifflin Company. All rights reserved.
Cite This Source
Word of the Day
Word Value for genetically
17
21
Scrabble
Words With Friends
Nearby words for genetically modified organism
genetic testing
genetic-engineer
genetical
genetically
genetically modified
genetically modified organism
geneticist
genetics
genetotrophic
genette
geneva
Quiz Yourself
About
Terms & Privacy
2016 Dictionary.com, LLC.