Sustainable Table | Genetic Engineering
GRACE
Communications Foundation
food Program
Genetic Engineering
Email This
Delicious
Digg
Tweet
sidebarA
Genetic engineering (GE) is the modification of an organisms genetic composition by artificial means, often involving the transfer of specific traits, or genes, from one organism into a plant or animal of an entirely different species. When gene transfer occurs, the resulting organism is called transgenic or a GMO (genetically modified organism).
Genetic engineering is different from traditional cross breeding, where genes can only be exchanged between closely related species. With genetic engineering, genes from completely different species can be inserted into one another. For example, scientists in Taiwan have successfully inserted jellyfish genes into pigs in order to make them glow in the dark. F
What are genes?
All life is made up of one or more cells. Each cell contains a nucleus, and inside each nucleus are strings of molecules called DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). Each strand of DNA is divided into small sections called genes. These genes contain a unique set of instructions that determine how the organism grows, develops, looks, and lives.
During genetic engineering processes, specific genes are removed from one organism and inserted into another plant or animal, thus transferring specific traits.
GE Crops
Nearly 400 million acres of farmland worldwide are now used to grow GE crops such as cotton, corn, soybeans and rice. FIn the United States, GE soybeans, corn and cotton make up 93%, 88% and 94% of the total acreage of the respective crops. FThe majority of genetically engineered crops grown today are engineered to be resistant to pesticides and/or herbicides so that they can withstand being sprayed with weed killer while the rest of the plants in the field die.
GE proponents claim genetically engineered crops use fewer pesticides than non-GE crops, when in reality GE plants can require even more chemicals. FThis is because weeds become resistant to pesticides, leading farmers to spray even more on their crops. FThis pollutes the environment, exposes food to higher levels of toxins, and creates greater safety concerns for farmers and farm workers.
Some GE crops are actually classified as pesticides. For instance, the New Leaf potato, which has since been taken off grocery shelves, was genetically engineered to produce the Bt (Bacillus thuringiensis) toxin in order to kill any pests that attempted to eat it. The actual potato was designated as a pesticide and was therefore regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), instead of the Food & Drug Administration (FDA), which regulates food. Because of this, safety testing for these potatoes was not as rigorous as with food, since the EPA regulations had never anticipated that people would intentionally consume pesticides as food. F
Adequate research has not yet been carried out to identify the effects of eating animals that have been fed genetically engineered grain, nor have sufficient studies been conducted on the effects of directly consuming genetically engineered crops like corn and soy. Yet despite our lack of knowledge, GE crops are widely used throughout the world as both human and animal food.
GE Animals
Scientists are currently working on ways to genetically engineer farm animals. Atlantic salmon have been engineered to grow to market size twice as fast as wild salmon, Fchickens have been engineered so that they cannot spread H5N1 avian flu to other birds, Fand research is being conducted to create cattle that cannot develop the infectious prions that can cause bovine spongiform encephalopathy (aka mad cow disease). FAt this point, no GE animals have been approved by the FDA to enter the food supply. FGenetic engineering experiments on animals do, however, pose potential risks to food safety and the environment.
In 2003, scientists at the University of Illinois were conducting an experiment that involved inserting cow genes into female pigs in order to increase their milk production. They also inserted a synthetic gene to make milk digestion easier for the piglets. Although the experimental pigs were supposed to be destroyed, as instructed by the FDA, 386 offspring of the experimental pigs were sold to slaughterhouses, where they were processed and sent to grocery stores as pork chops, sausage, and bacon. F
University of Illinois representatives claimed that the piglets did not inherit the genetic modifications made to their mothers, but there was still a clear risk to the people who purchased products made from the 386 piglets. Since no genetically engineered animal products have ever been approved by the FDA, the pork products that reached supermarket shelves were technically illegal for human consumption. As a result of the accident, the FDA sent letters in May 2003 to all land-grant universities, reminding researchers that their work "may require" licensing under the animal drug law. F
What are the concerns over GE food?
Many concerns have been raised over the inadequate testing of the effects of genetic engineering on humans and the environment. Genetic engineering is still an emerging field, and scientists do not know exactly what can result from putting the DNA of one species into another. The introduction of foreign DNA into an organism could trigger other DNA in the plant or animal to mutate and change. FIn addition, researchers do not know if there are any long-term or unintended side effects from eating GE foods. F
Critics of genetic engineering believe that GE foods must be proven safe before they are sold to the public. Specific concerns over genetic engineering include: F
Allergic reactions. There are two concerns regarding allergic reactions. The first is with known allergens. For example, if genes from nuts are inserted into other foods, it could cause severe reactions in people with nut allergies. Therefore, there is concern that people with known allergies will not be aware that the genetically engineered food they are eating contains substances to which they are allergic. The second concern is that new allergies might be created, since new combinations of genes and traits have the potential to cause allergic reactions that have never existed before.
Gene mutation. Scientists dont know if the forced insertion of one gene into another gene could destabilize the entire organism, and encourage mutations and abnormalities.
Antibiotic resistance. Almost all GE foods contain antibiotic resistance marker genes that help producers know whether the new genetic material was transferred to the host plant or animal. GE food could make disease-causing bacteria even more resistant to antibiotics, which could increase the spread of disease throughout the world.
Loss of nutrition. Genetic engineering may change the nutritional value of food. F
Environmental Damage. Insects, birds and wind might carry genetically altered pollen to other fields and forests, pollinating plants and randomly creating new species that would carry on the genetic modifications.
Gene pollution cannot be cleaned up.
Once released into the environment, genetically engineered organisms cannot be cleaned up or recalled. So, unlike chemical and nuclear contamination, which can at least be contained, genetic pollution cannot be isolated and separated from the environment in which it is spreading.
Superweeds
GE crops can cross-pollinate related weed species, passing on their ability to survive the application of weed killers. Even without passing on that specific genetic trait, the widespread adoption of GE crops that are resistant to herbicides like Roundup has led to dramatic increases in the use of this weed killer, and weeds have gradually developed resistance to the herbicide. This leads to the evolution of superweeds that are very difficult to control. Already, superweeds have infested 12 million acres in the United States. FAt least 20 weed species worldwide are resistant to Roundup, including aggressive weeds like ragweed, pigweed and waterhemp. F
Terminator seeds
Some GE seeds are engineered so that plants cannot reproduce their seeds. In many parts of the world, saving seeds from season to season is the only way farmers are able to survive and continue growing food. However, with GE technology, seeds can be sterile, forcing farmers to rely on seed companies for their livelihood, an expense they may not be able to bear.
What are some genetically engineered foods thathave been approved for commercial use? F
Alfalfa
Cherry Tomato*
Chicory (Cichorium intybus)
Corn
Cotton
Flax*
Papaya
Potato*
Rapeseed (Canola)
Rice*
Soybean
Squash
Sugar beet
Tomato*
* These GE crops were approved by the federal government, but are not known to be commercially available. F
Did You Know?
Five countries make up 90% of the worlds GE acreage: F  US (69%)  Brazil (30%)  Argentina (24%)  India (11%)  Canada (10%)
More than 93% of soybeans grown in the US in 2011 were bioengineered. F
Herbicide tolerant GE crops have created weed resistance, causing pesticide use to increase by 70 million pounds between 1996 and 2003. F
In January 2006, Taiwanese scientists created a new breed of glow-in-the-dark pigs by inserting genes from jellyfish into the pigs' embryos. F
What You Can Do
Look for foods that are labeled GMO free. Today, almost all major brands have GMO ingredients, including many processed foods that contain sugar made from GE sugar beets, corn syrup, or soy ingredients. Visit the True Food Network to find out what brands you can eat and what you should avoid.
Eat organic foods. USDA regulations prohibit organic foods from containing GE ingredients, and organic meats cannot come from animals that were fed GE crops. So eating organic is a surefire way to avoid GE foods.
Learn more about genetic engineering from Food & Water Watch.
For More Information
True Food NetworkThis network aims to educate consumers about the dangers of genetically engineered food. Their True Food Shoppers Guide lists brand-name foods that contain GMOs and those that are GE free
JustLabelIt This coalition strives to educate consumers about GE foods and to urge the FDA to label GE foods.
Reports and Articles
Hazards of Genetically Engineered Foods and Crops: Why We Need A Global Moratorium(Ronnie Cummins, 1999)
The UN Food and Agriculture Organizations Glossary of Biotechnology for Food and Agriculture (FAO, 2001)
The Case for a GM-Free, Sustainable World Review of scientific literature that shows the dangers of genetically modified crops as well as the benefits of sustainable and organic agriculture. (Independent Science Panel, June 2003)
Genetically Modified Crops and Food (Friends of the Earth, 2003)
Failure to Yield (Union of Concerned Scientists, 2009)
Who Benefits from GM Crops (Friends of the Earth, 2011)
Genetically Engineered Food: An Overview (Food & Water Watch, 2012)
GMO Myths and Truths (Earth Open Source, 2012)
Learn More
Label GMO Foods? Our Right2Know Have you ever seen a label that lists genetically engineered (GE) soy as an ingredient on these packages? No? That's because the label doesn't exist. Some folks are out to change that.
A Controversy Exists: Family Farmers Continue to Take on Monsanto Undeterred by last month's dismissal, the farmers behind OSGATA et al vs. Monsanto continue to press their case. Meanwhile, Vernon Brown, a farmer who was sued by the biotech behemoth, is taking his case to the Supreme Court.
Biodiversity Biodiversity, which is critical to robust ecosystems and human life, is threatened by the pollution and genetic erosion caused by industrial agriculture.
Genetically Modified Organisms: If This Doesnt Convince You, Nothing Will To start at the beginning,
what are Genetically Modified Organisms? GMOs have had their DNA altered in a way that doesnt happen naturally. Individual genes are transferred from one organism to another to obtain a desired trait or characterist
Industrial Crop Production Learn how industrial crop production degrades the environment and impairs human health.
So Will That Be the Wild or Patented Salmon? It's the year of two salmons: one genetically altered and under review by the FDA, and the other an inhabitant of one of the last great wild salmon runs (which is unfortunately situated atop a bunch of copper and gold deposits).
Tell Walmart to Reject New GMO Sweet Corn There's a new GMO in town: Monsanto's GE sweet corn. If you're unhappy about this, you're not alone. Food and Water Watch has initiated a national campaign to pressure Walmart to refuse to sell products using the GE corn.
Tags
agriculture & environment agriculture & public health biodiversity food ag regulation food safety genetic engineering impacts of agriculture industrial crop production
Sign-up forour newsletters!
Related
The GOOD, the Bad and the Wasteful
Organic Agriculture
Heritage Animal Breeds and Heirloom Crop Varieties
Organic Agriculture: Fifty (Plus) Shades of Gray
Industrial Livestock Production
Mind Your Beeswax: Calling Attention to CCD (A Film Review)
Food Fright!
On Food and Pharmaceuticals
Got Filth? If Industrial Dairy Makes a Mess, Greenwash It!
GE Salmon: Swimming Away with Subsidies
Food Ark
All is Fair (Trade) in Love and Chocolate
Tell Walmart to Reject New GMO Sweet Corn
Drought and the Food, Water and Energy Nexus
Farming and Fracking Dont Mix: A Farmer Speaks Out
Pollans Classic 'Food Rules' Is Now a Beautiful Animation
Is There Arsenic In Your Energy Bar?
University Land Grabs in Africa and Student Activism
Pesticides
Scientists Point to Pesticides as Culprit in Honeybee Die-Offs
Another Bee (Plus!) Movie: Queen of the Sun, A Film Review
Water Quality
Three Easy Steps to Sustainability
Food Safety
Pesticides
A Controversy Exists: Family Farmers Continue to Take on Monsanto
Are You Roundup Ready? High Levels of Glyphosate in City Folks' Urine, and More Bad Monsanto News
New safety concerns raised by GMO corn study
Antibiotics
Local & Regional Food Systems
Soil Quality
Discover
Popular
Natural Gas Fracking - Introduction
Hormones
Organic Agriculture
How To Save Water
Animal Feed
Sustainable Agriculture - The Basics
rBGH
Food Issues
Water Quality
Genetic Engineering
Food Security & Food Access
Animal Welfare
Water Program
Impacts of Industrial Agriculture
Antibiotics
Spotlight Water Footprints
Superstorm Sandy Demands We Pay Attention to Climate Change - and the Nexus
What\'s Your Congressperson\'s Food Policy Score?
Intro to Food Waste
Water and Energy
Water and Agriculture
Energy and Agriculture
Natural Gas Fracking
Our Heroes: Rick Nahmias, Founder and Executive Director of Food Forward
Food Issues
Cook Sustainably
Power Plants Kill Fish
Antibiotics
Nexus Food Water and Energy
Staff Picks
What Debt in Chicken Farming Says About American Agriculture
How To Save Water
18 Little-Known Facts That Will Motivate You to Cut Back on Food Waste
The Meatrix
Home
Food Program
Water Program
Energy Program
Ecocentric Blog
Multimedia
Kits
Best of the Web
About
Grants
Email us
Programs
Blog
Foundation
Website
Media
Newsletter
Signup
Newsletter Archive
RSS Feeds
Videos
Podcasts
News Briefs
Social Networks
Linkedin
Twitter
Facebook
Pinterest
Privacy and Terms of Use
Content Request
Sitemap
GRACE Communications Foundation
215 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10016 United States Tel: 212 726 9161
 2016 GRACE Communications Foundation
Our Sites
Food
Sustainable TableOur Food Program
About the Program
Eat Well Guide
The Meatrix
Ecocentric Blog  Food
Food & The Nexus
Students & Educators
The Issues:
Sustainable Agriculture
The Basics
Sustainable Livestock Husbandry
Sustainable Crop Production
Innovative Agriculture
New Farmers
Organic Agriculture
Local/Regional Food Systems
Food & Personal Health
Sustainable Seafood
The Basics
Aquaculture Overview
Seafood Policy, Issues and Projects
Innovative Agriculture
Seafood: Real Food Right Now
Resources to Find Sustainable Seafood
Industrial Agriculture
Industrial Livestock Production
Antibiotics
Hormones
rBGH
Animal Feed
Waste Management
Industrial Crop Production
Pesticides
Genetic Engineering
Biofuels
Industrial Agriculture Impacts
Environment
Air Quality
Water Quality
Soil Quality
Biodiversity
Energy Use & Climate Change
Public Health
Food & Personal Health
Community & Economy
Workers
Animal Welfare
Food Processing & Distribution
Food Safety
Food Irradiation
Food Processing & Slaughterhouses
Food Access/Food Security
Local/Regional Food Systems
Food Waste
Food Policy & Economics
Food Economics
Food Policy & Regulation
Take Action
Handouts
Sustainable Food Basics
Issues in Depth
Questions to Ask
Meatless Monday
Eating Sustainably
Heath & Nutrition
Shop Sustainably
Cook Sustainably
Seasonal Food Guide
Reducing Food Waste
Real Food Right Now
Water
Our Water Program
About the Program
Publications
Ecocentric Blog - Water
Water Issues
The Importance of Clean Water
The Hidden Water in Everyday Products
How the United States Uses Water
Indoor Water Use at Home
Outdoor Water Use at Home
Water Use, Withdrawal, Consumption
Buy Less Stuff; Use Less Water
Bottled Water and Water Conservation
Climate Change and Water Resources
SummerTime Outdoor Water Use
Long Island's Drinking Water - Challenges and Solutions
What is Your Water Footprint?
Water Footprint Calculator
Water Footprint Concepts
The Water Footprint of Food
The Water Footprint of Energy
The Hidden Water in Everyday Products
International Water Footprint Comparisons
How to Save Water
In the Bathroom
In the Kitchen
Fix a Leak
Around the House
Outdoors
The Water in Your Energy
The Water in your Food
The Water in the Things You Buy
Video for Kids  Aqua: Conserve Water
Nexus Connecting Food,
Water and Energy
What is the Nexus?
Meet the Nexus Guide
Know the Nexus Report
Nexus by the Numbers
The Nexus in Action
Nexus  Organizations
Nexus  Key Reports
Energy and Agriculture
How are Energy and Agriculture Connected?
Biofuels
The Rush to Ethanol
Energy and Water
How are Energy and Water Connected?
Water Footprint of Energy
Water and Agriculture
Water Footprint of Food
Renewable Energy at the Nexus
Food Waste
Power Plants Kill Fish
Natural Gas Fracking
Climate Change
Energy
Our Energy Program
About the Program
Publications
Ecocentric Blog  Energy
Energy Tools from Around the Web
Energy Efficiency
Energy Efficiency Guide
How to Save Energy
Summer Tips
Winter Tips
Tips for Anytime of the Year
Tips for Car-Owners
Energy Efficiency Resources
Energy Efficiency Overview
Renewable Energy
Plugging Renewables Into the Grid
Distributed Renewable Energy Systems
Introduction
Connecting Renewable Energy to the Grid
Community Renewables: Expanding the Benefits of Net Metering
Local Government Policies for Distributed Solar
Local Government Policies for Small Wind Turbines
State Policies for Distributed Renewable Energy
Local Permitting for Renewable Energy
Nexus Connecting Food,
Water and Energy
What is the Nexus?
Meet the Nexus Guide
Know the Nexus Report
Nexus by the Numbers
The Nexus in Action
Nexus  Organizations
Nexus  Key Reports
Energy and Agriculture
How are Energy and Agriculture Connected?
Biofuels
The Rush to Ethanol
Energy and Water
How are Energy and Water Connected?
Water Footprint of Energy
Water and Agriculture
Water Footprint of Food
Renewable Energy at the Nexus
Food Waste
Water Footprint
Climate Change
Power Plants Kill Fish
How do Power Plants Harm Fish?
10 Reasons to Care about Power Plant Water Use
Power Plant Animation
Federal Regulation
Blog Series  Power Plants Kill Fish
Natural Gas Fracking
What is Natural Gas Fracking?
Fracking Resources and Reports
Ecocentric Blog Series  Hydrofracking
Freeing the Grid
Introduction
Net Metering
Interconnection
Ecocentric Blog
Multimedia
About
Grants
Videos
Podcasts
Eco News
Email This
Delicious
Digg
Tweet
A
A
A