GMOs - Genetically Modified Organisms | Thrive
Javascript is disabled in your browser settings.
The THRIVE site cannot properly function without Javascript.
Tweet
HOME
|
Movie
Watch THRIVE
Buy
the DVD
Bonus Clips
Press Room
Fact Check
Meet THRIVE Pioneers
Screening Schedule
Host a Screening
FAQs
|
Get Informed
Explore Fosters Research
The 12 Sectors
Test Your Knowledge  Reality Check
Resource Tree
Fosters Blog
ThriveTogether Archive
Get Involved
Top Ten Actions
Solutions Hub
Resources for Effective Action
Sign Up for Critical Mass Actions
Get Personal Support
|
Stay Connected
Sign Up for THRIVE Updates
Join Us on Facebook
Follow Us on Twitter
Follow Fosters Blog
|
Store
Related
Back to Intro
Donate
All donations go toward sustaining the THRIVE movement, including coordinating solutions strategies, critical mass actions, maintaining the website and customer interface, and translating the movie into more languages. We rely on donations and the sale of DVDs to keep the THRIVE movement going.
Choose a donation amount:
$
Secure donations powered by WePay
Want to donate by check?
What do donations fund?
Donations are not tax-deductible.
Critical Issues
Nuclear Radiation
Chemtrails and Human Geo-Engineering
Pollution
GMOs - Genetically Modified Organisms
Climate Change
Plastics
Honey Bee Colony Collapse
See Critical Issues for all Sectors and Topics
Vitals
Navigating Insights
Follow the Money
Reality Check
environment Reality Check
Quiz
Close
Close
Continue
Big Qs
Solutions
What Can I Do?
Boycott Banks that Fund Environmentally Destructive Industries
Start or Join a Community Garden
Support Your Local Farmers
Create Local Ordinances to Protect Against Corporate Pollution
Eat Less or No Meat
See Actions for all Sectors and Topics
Success Stories
Small Farmer Charges Monsanto for Contamination of Crops
Cubans Create Thriving Organic Food Community
Zero-Waste Community Emerges Out of Grassroots Movement
See Success Stories for all Sectors and Topics
Video Clips
Wall Street and the Water Cycle - Vandana Shiva
There is No Small Work - Vandana Shiva
No Despair if Aligned With the Power of the Universe - Vandana Shiva
People are Stonger than Capital - Vandana Shiva
Seeds Honoring Diversity in Social Non-Violence - Satish Kumar
Need to Understand Causes - Satish Kumar
Wall Street Profits from Water Privatization - Vandana Shiva
Helping Environment Can Make Money - Catherine Austin Fitts
GMO Free Zones - Vandana Shiva
See Video Clips for all Sectors and Topics
Video
Close
Pioneers
Satish Kumar
Vandana Shiva
See Pioneers for all Sectors and Topics
Comments
post comment
RESOURCE TREE
The 12 Sectors / Environment
GMOs - Genetically Modified Organisms
DANGER: Genetically Modified Crops Are Getting into Everything and Everyone
Why would we risk our health, threaten evolution and become dependent on chemical companies for our food?
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) have been altered by humans who force non-food genes  from other species  into the DNA of plants, changing the very nature of the food itself. Monsantos mutated seeds have taken over 90% of the U. S. soy crop and 95% of the corn. Wheat and fish are next on their agenda. Despite valiant and growing resistance around the world, GMOs are still on the rise.
Why are GMOs dangerous?
GMOs are bad for our health  In 2009, the American Academy of
Environmental Medicine (AAEM) called for a moratorium on GM foods stating
that there is more than a casual
association between GM foods and adverse health effects. There is
causation.[1] This was
confirmed in several animal studies. Many doctors have also acknowledged
that GM foods cause adverse health effects and are prescribing GM-free
diets.[2] After reviewing more than 600 scientific journals, world renowned
biologist Pushpa M. Bhargava, concludes that genetically modified organisms
(GMOs) are a major contributor to the sharply deteriorating health of
Americans.
Animals exposed to GMOs suffer lethal
consequences  Lab rats, mice and chickens exposed to GMOs, as well
as sheep grazing on GMO crops, are often smaller. Most of their babies are
dying and they are showing up with cancer, bleeding stomachs, black
patches and major irritation in both their intestines and livers. GMO fed
livestock have developed pro-lapsed uteruses, delivered offspring
pre-maturely and become infertile. There is evidence that the DNA mutations from these GMO products
transfers into our own stomachs and continues to function.[3] Monsantos Genetically modified corn is also causing organ failure in
rats.[4]
Some GMO seeds cant reproduce 
Monsanto (the largest biotech company in the world) has created a
terminator seed that is unable to reproduce. This makes it impossible
for farmers to save seeds and replant crops. They become dependent on
biotech companies instead of nature in order to grow food. The newer,
aptly named traitor seeds wont
even develop through the natural stages of the plant unless sprayed with
Monsantos chemicals.
GMOs threaten evolution and freedom  The very course of
evolution itself and the freedom of people to grow their own food are
threatened. Millions of years of natural evolution and diversity of seeds
are being wiped out in a generation - what we believe is a clear intention
to control food worldwide.
GMO takeover of farmers freedom is a
major factor in suicides  Between 1997 and 2007, 182,900 farmers in
India took their own lives. The National Crime Records Bureau of India
estimates that there is roughly one suicide every 30 minutes. [5]
GMOs can contaminate other crops  GMOs can cross-pollinate and spread their altered genes to other
plants. These altered genes have the potential to spread far and wide, and
make it into everyones food. Farmers whose crops have been contaminated
have been repeatedly sued by Monsanto for violation of patent rights. [6]
See how a small farmer has claimed a moral victory against Monsanto by charging them for contamination of his crops. (Click here)
Pregnant women and babies are at great
risk  Among others, biologist
David Schubert of the Salk Institute warns that children are the most
likely to be adversely effected by toxins and other dietary problems
related to Genetically Modified foods. He says without adequate studies
the children become the experimental animals. [7]
GMOs and the Green Revolution are
not solving the global food crisis. They are making it worse. A four-year
study by 400 scientists concluded in 2008 that monoculture and genetic
modification of crops are creating significant problems and that small-scale
organic farms are best qualified to feed the world. The study was
virtually ignored by the US corporate press.[8]
How did we develop such an unhealthy food model? If you follow the money, youll find that this was a strategy initiated by the Rockefeller Foundation and large agricultural companies to breed dependency and gain more profits. To find out more, go to the Follow the Money Story.
OPPORTUNITY: Organic Farming is On the Rise and Becoming More Affordable
While GMO giants are desperately trying to dominate the agriculture industry, organic farming is rapidly gaining popularity. The number of certified organic farms in the U.S. has almost doubled in the last 10 years, which helps it to become affordable to more people.
Why is organic better?
No pesticides and herbicides 
organic foods are not sprayed with petroleum based toxins that poison farm
workers, pollute our soils, water and air, and are bad for our health.
Better farming practices  in
order to keep healthy crops, organic farmers use more natural farming
techniques such as crop rotation, composting and the interspersing of
crops for natural predator resistance and soil health.
Its more nutritious and tastier 
more nutrients from the soil give the food a better flavor.
There are still some problems with organic. For example, there are lots of industrial organic farms that only grow one crop, organic certification is expensive and the standards are being deceptively diluted.
Even more promising are the Permaculture and Biodynamic farming models. These go beyond organic standards and include more holistic approaches such as land conservation, biodiversity, and self-sufficiency.
WHAT CAN I DO?
Join the Millions Against Monsanto Campaign - click here.
Help Inform Others of the Risks of GMO Food - As organic food grows in popularity it becomes less expensive and therefore increasingly accessible.
Shop at a Farmers Market - By shopping at farmers markets you can reduce the use of fossil fuels, get to know your local growers, enhance local food systems, build strong local economies, and enjoy fresh, healthy food all at the same time. Find a farmers market near you.
Join a CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) - Get your food in a box on a weekly basis from local farmers. You usually get an assortment of veggies, fruit, eggs, dairy, and bread that are constantly changing with the seasons. Plus you get to meet the growers and other health-oriented people in your community. Find a CSA near you or view listings of CSAs throughout the U.S.
Buy Local and Organic as Much as Possible - Some grocery stores sell produce from local farmers, however, because its often cheaper and easier to go through big distributors our food is often shipped from hundreds or thousands of miles away, even when its being grown right down the road. To show your support for local farms, and to help get the cost down and the food accessible to more people, if you can afford it, buy local and organic as much as possible and voice your concern to managers at stores when options are limited.
Support Organizations That are Working to Protect People and the Environment from Unsafe GMO Practices - Including: The Center for Food Safety, Natural Solutions Foundation, The Organic Consumers Association, and Greenpeace, Institute for Responsible Technology
RELATED LINKS
Actions:
Greenpeace Protests Genetically Modified Corn in Mexico
Another German Minister Calls for GMO Maize Ban
Successes:
Monsanto Backs Off on Second Generation GMO crop in Europe Rather Than Reveal Research and Safety Data
Switzerland Bans GMOs till 2012
Movies & Videos:
Food Inc.
The Future of Food
Dr. Oz on Genetically Modified Foods
[1] Genetically Modified Foods by Amy Dean, D.O. and Jennifer Armstrong, M.D. This statement was reviewed and approved by the Executive Committee of the American Academy of Environmental Medicine on May 8, 2009. http://www.aaemonline.org/gmopost.html
[2] For example, Dr. Amy Dean, a Michigan internal medicine specialist, and board member of AAEM says, I strongly recommend patients eat strictly non-genetically modified foods. Ohio allergist Dr. John Boyles says I used to test for soy allergies all the time, but now that soy is genetically engineered, it is so dangerous that I tell people never to eat it.
[3] http://www.responsibletechnology.org/utility/showArticle/?objectID=2989
[4]http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/01/19/monsanto-gm-corn-causing_n_425195.html
[5] http://articles.mercola.com/sites/articles/archive/2009/05/05/Could-Monsanto-Be-Responsible-for-One-Indian-Farmers-Death-Every-Thirty-Minutes.aspx
[6] The Multiple Ways Monsanto is Putting Normal Seeds Out of Reach:
http://www.opednews.com/articles/The-multiple-ways-Monsanto-by-Linn-Cohen-Cole-090203-854.html , Raids on Seeds (LIFE , itself)by Monsanto:
http://www.opednews.com/articles/Raids-on-Seeds-life-itsel-by-Linn-Cohen-Cole-081215-45.html
[7] Doctors Warn: Avoid Genetically Modified Food:
http://www.responsibletechnology.org/utility/showArticle/?objectID=2989
[8] Study by International Assessment for Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development: http://www.agassessment.org/reports/IAASTD/EN/Agriculture%20at%20a%20Crossroads_Global%20Report%20(English).pdf
Critical Issues
Nuclear Radiation
Why would we risk all life on Earth by exposing ourselves to the most dangerous pollutant ever discovered
when there are safe, sustainable and cheap alternatives?
Read More
Chemtrails and Human Geo-Engineering
Governments and corporations are deliberately manipulating and altering Earth's climate, endangering the lives of people all over the world. Two of the most extreme cases of geo-engineering are "chemtrails
Read More
Pollution
Do you believe individuals and organizations who destroy the health of others and of eco-systems should be stopped and forced to provide restitution?
Read More
GMOs - Genetically Modified Organisms
Why would we risk our health, threaten evolution and become dependent on chemical companies for our food?
Read More
Climate Change
How does climate change relate to the banking elite's effort to transcend national sovereignty, establish global governance and create a global tax to fund their dominance?
Read More
Plastics
How does consuming plastic threaten our well-being and benefit the oil industry at the same time?
Read More
Honey Bee Colony Collapse
What are humans doing that would be causing a vast percentage of bees to die off, and how can we save them?
Read More
Videos on THRIVE
Link
Embed
Close
Video Clips
Wall Street and the Water Cycle - Vandana Shiva
There is No Small Work - Vandana Shiva
No Despair if Aligned With the Power of the Universe - Vandana Shiva
People are Stonger than Capital - Vandana Shiva
Seeds Honoring Diversity in Social Non-Violence - Satish Kumar
Need to Understand Causes - Satish Kumar
Wall Street Profits from Water Privatization - Vandana Shiva
Helping Environment Can Make Money - Catherine Austin Fitts
GMO Free Zones - Vandana Shiva
Click and drag to rotate. Double-click on a Sector to visit it.
Home
|
The Movie
|
The Problem
|
The Code
|
Solutions
|
The 12 Sectors
|
Store
|
Fosters Blog
About Us
|
Contact Us
|
Terms of Use
|
Privacy Policy
|
Disclaimers
|
FAQs
 Copyright 20112016 Clear Compass Media