Genetically Modified Organisms - European Commission
Health and Food Safety
Accessibility tools
Home
Menu
Go to content
Service tools
Cookies
Legal notice
Contact
Search
Language
Current languageen
Navigation path
European Commission
Food Safety
Plants
GMOs
Home Page
Health
Food
Animals
Plants
AMR
Genetically Modified Organisms
Legislation
GMO Authorisation
GMO Register
Public consultations
Traceability and Labelling
Post-authorisation
Transboundary movements
Coexistence with conventional & organic agriculture
Socio-economic considerations
International affairs
Reports and studies
All Topics
Additional tools
Genetically Modified Organisms
Food and feed generally originates from plants and animals grown and bred by humans for several thousand years. Over time, those plants and animals with the most desirable characteristics were chosen for breeding the next generations of food and feed. This was, for example, the case for plants with an increased resistance to environmental pressures such as diseases or with an increased yield.
These desirable characteristics appeared through naturally occurring variations in the genetic make-up of those plants and animals. In recent times, it has become possible to modify the genetic make-up of living cells and organisms using techniques of modern biotechnology called gene technology. The genetic material is modified artificially to give it a new property (e.g. a plant's resistance to a disease, insect or drought, a plant's tolerance to a herbicide, improving a food's quality or nutritional value, increased yield).
Such organisms are called "genetically modified organisms" (GMOs). Food and feed which contain or consist of such GMOs, or are produced from GMOs, are called "genetically modified (GM) food or feed".
New: Commission proposes changes allowing Member States freedom to restrict or prohibit use of Authorised GMOs.
Quick Links
GMO register
EU Pesticides database
Procedure to apply for authorisation of a PPP
Plant variety database
Community Plant Variety Office (CPVO)
Health and food audits and analysis
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)
E-news
Last update: 18.08.2016
Legal notice
Contact
Top