Genetically engineered foods: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
Skip navigation
U.S. National Library of Medicine
The navigation menu has been collapsed.
Menu
Health Topics
Drugs & Supplements
Videos & Tools
About MedlinePlus
Show Search
Search MedlinePlus
GO
About MedlinePlus
Site Map
FAQs
Contact Us
Health TopicsDrugs & SupplementsVideos & Tools
Espaol
You Are Here:
Home

Medical Encyclopedia

Genetically engineered foods
URL of this page: //medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002432.htm
Genetically engineered foods
To use the sharing features on this page, please enable JavaScript.
Genetically engineered foods have had foreign genes (genes from other plants or animals) inserted into their genetic codes.Genetic engineering can be done with plants, animals, or bacteria and other microorganisms. We have bred plants and animals for thousands of years to produce the desired traits. For example, we produced dogs ranging from poodles to Great Danes, and roses from sweet-smelling miniatures to today's long-lasting, but scent-free reds.Selective breeding over time created these wide variations, but the process depended on nature to produce the desired gene. Humans then chose to mate individual animals or plants that carried that gene in order to make the desired characteristics more common or more pronounced.We have been genetically engineering plants since the 1990s. Genetic engineering allows scientists to speed this process up by moving desired genes from one plant into another, or even from an animal to a plant or vice versa.Function
Potential benefits of genetically engineered food include:More nutritious foodTastier foodDisease- and drought-resistant plants that require fewer environmental resources (such as water and fertilizer)Decreased use of pesticidesIncreased supply of food with reduced cost and longer shelf lifeFaster growing plants and animalsFood with more desirable traits, such as potatoes that absorb less fat when friedMedicinal foods that could be used as vaccines or other medicines Potential risks include:Modified plants or animals may have genetic changes that are unexpected and harmful.Modified organisms may interbreed with natural organisms. This could lead to the extinction of the original organism or to other unpredictable environmental effects.Plants may be less resistant to some pests and more susceptible to others. Food Sources
Tomatoes, potatoes, squash, corn, and soybeans have been genetically altered through biotechnology. Many more foods contain engineered ingredients and more are being developed. Check with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) -- www.fda.gov for more information.Side Effects
The Food and Drug Administration regulates production and labeling of genetically engineered foods. Some people have raised concerns that the genes from one food that are inserted into another food may cause an allergic reaction. For instance, if peanut genes are in tomatoes, could someone with a peanut allergy react to tomatoes?In January 2001, the FDA's Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition proposed that developers of bioengineered food submit scientific and safety information to the FDA at least 120 days before the food is sold. Further details on these foods may be found on the FDA website.Recommendations
In addition to the FDA, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) regulate bioengineered plants and animals.Genetically engineered foods are generally regarded as safe. There has not been enough testing, however, to ensure complete safety. There are no reports of illness or injury due to genetically engineered foods. Each new genetically engineered food will have to be judged individually.Alternative Names
Bioengineered foods; GMOs; Genetically modified foodsReferences
Food and Drug Administration. Questions & Answers on Food from Genetically Engineered Plants. FDA.gov. www.fda.gov/food/foodscienceresearch/biotechnology/ucm346030.htm. Last updated July 22, 2014. Accessed Nov. 3, 2014.Key S, Ma JK, Drake PM. Genetically modified plants and human health. J R Soc Med. 2008;101:290-8. PMID: 18515776 www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18515776. Sudak NL, Harvie J. Integrative strategies for planetary health. In: Rakel D, ed. Integrative Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 105.United States Dept. of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. Biotechnology. Aphis.usda.gov. www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/biotechnology. Accessed Nov. 3, 2014.U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. EPA's Regulation of Biotechnology for Use in Pest Management, May 2014. Epa.gov. www.epa.gov/pesticides/biopesticides/reg_of_biotech/eparegofbiotech.htm. Accessed Nov. 3, 2014.
Update Date 10/28/2014
Updated by: Emily Wax, RD, The Brooklyn Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Isla Ogilvie, PhD, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Food Safety
Browse the Encyclopedia
A.D.A.M., Inc. is accredited by URAC, also known as the American Accreditation HealthCare Commission (www.urac.org). URAC's accreditation program is an independent audit to verify that A.D.A.M. follows rigorous standards of quality and accountability. A.D.A.M. is among the first to achieve this important distinction for online health information and services. Learn more about A.D.A.M.'s editorial policy, editorial process and privacy policy. A.D.A.M. is also a founding member of Hi-Ethics and subscribes to the principles of the Health on the Net Foundation (www.hon.ch).
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed physician should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. Copyright 1997-2016, A.D.A.M., Inc. Duplication for commercial use must be authorized in writing by ADAM Health Solutions.
About MedlinePlus
Site Map
FAQs
Contact Us
Get email updates
Subscribe to RSS
Follow us
Disclaimers
Copyright
Privacy
Accessibility
Quality Guidelines
Viewers & Players
MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs
For Developers
U.S. National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health
Page last updated: 23 August 2016