Food from Genetically Engineered Plants
Skip to main page content
Skip to search
Skip to topics menu
Skip to common links
HHS
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
FDA
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Protecting and Promoting Your Health
A to Z Index
Follow FDA
En Espaol
Search FDA
Submit search
Popular Content
Home
Food
Drugs
Medical Devices
Radiation-Emitting Products
Vaccines, Blood & Biologics
Animal & Veterinary
Cosmetics
Tobacco Products
Food
Home
Food
Science & Research (Food)
Food from Genetically Engineered Plants
Food from Genetically Engineered Plants
Share
Tweet
Linkedin
Pin it
More sharing options
Linkedin
Pin it
Email
Print
Consumer Info About Food From Genetically Engineered Plants FDA regulates the safety of food for humans and animals, including foods produced from genetically engineered (GE) plants. Foods from GE plants must meet the same food safety requirements as foods derived from traditionally bred plants. Read more at Consumer Info About Food From Genetically Engineered Plants. How FDA Regulates Food from Genetically Engineered Plants The existing FDA safety requirements impose a clear legal duty on everyone in the farm to table continuum to market safe foods to consumers, regardless of the process by which such foods are created. It is unlawful to produce, process, store, ship or sell to consumers unsafe foods. Read more on How FDA Regulates Food from Genetically Engineered Plants. FDA's Biotechnology Policy In the Federal Register of May 29, 1992 (57 FR 22984), FDA published its "Statement of Policy: Foods Derived from New Plant Varieties" (the 1992 policy). The 1992 policy clarified the agency's interpretation of the application of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act with respect to human foods and animal feeds derived from new plant varieties and provided guidance to industry on scientific and regulatory issues related to these foods. The 1992 policy applied to all foods derived from all new plant varieties, including varieties that are developed using recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) technology. This site refers to foods derived from plant varieties that are developed using rDNA technology as "bioengineered foods." Consultation Procedures In the 1992 policy, FDA recommended that developers consult with FDA about bioengineered foods under development; since issuance of the 1992 policy, developers have routinely done so. In June 1996, FDA provided additional guidance to industry on procedures for these consultations (the consultation procedures). These procedures describe a process in which a developer who intends to commercialize a bioengineered food meets with the agency to identify and discuss relevant safety, nutritional, or other regulatory issues regarding the bioengineered food and then submits to FDA a summary of its scientific and regulatory assessment of the food; FDA evaluates the submission and responds to the developer by letter. Premarket Notification Proposal In the Federal Register of January 18, 2001 (the premarket notification proposal; 66 FR 4706, available as text and 193 KB PDF), FDA issued a proposed rule that would require that developers submit a scientific and regulatory assessment of the bioengineered food 120 days before the bioengineered food is marketed. In the premarket notification proposal, FDA recommends that developers continue the practice of consulting with the agency before submitting the required premarket notice. The comment period for the proposed rule ended on April 3, 2001. Guidance for Submissions Guidance for Industry: Providing Regulatory Submissions in Electronic or Paper Format to the Office of Food Additive Safety; Draft Guidance USDA/APHIS Regulation of Bioengineered Plants Most bioengineered plants are considered "regulated articles" under regulations of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). At some stage of research and development of a regulated article that is intended for use as a food crop, a developer requests from APHIS a determination of the article's regulatory status. For additional information about APHIS' regulation of bioengineered plants, see APHIS' Role in Biotechnology on the USDA/APHIS Internet site. EPA Regulation of Pesticidal Substances The safe use of pesticidal substances is regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Thus, a bioengineered food that is the subject of a consultation with FDA may contain an introduced pesticidal substance also known as a plant-incorporated protectant (PIP) that is subject to review by EPA. For additional information about EPA's regulation of bioengineered foods that contain a pesticidal substance, see EPA's Internet site. Antibiotic Resistance Draft Guidance On May 6, 2015, FDA withdrew the Draft Guidance for Industry entitled: Use of Antibiotic Resistance Marker Genes in Transgenic Plants. The guidance was not finalized. If you have any questions about the use of antibiotic resistance marker genes in genetically engineered plants intended for use in human food, please contact the Office of Food Additive Safety in the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition at 240-402-1226. If you have questions about the use of antibiotic resistance marker genes in genetically engineered plants intended for use in animal food, please contact the Division of Animal Feeds, Office of Surveillance and Compliance in the Center for Veterinary Medicine at (240) 402-7077.
Most Popular
FDA Has Determined That the AquAdvantage Salmon is as Safe to Eat as Non-GE Salmon
Questions & Answers on Food from Genetically Engineered Plants
Labeling of Foods Derived From Genetically Engineered Plants
Guidance Documents
Biotechnology Safety Assessment
Draft Guidance for Industry: Voluntary Labeling Indicating Whether Food Has or Has Not Been Derived From Genetically Engineered Atlantic Salmon
Guidance for Industry: Voluntary Labeling Indicating Whether Foods Have or Have Not Been Derived from Genetically Engineered Plants
Draft Guidance: Regulatory Submissions to the Office of Food Additive Safety
Contact FDA
(240)-402-1200
Fax:(301)-436-2973
premarkt@fda.hhs.gov
Office of Food Additive Safety
Additional Contact Information
CFSAN
5001 Campus Drive
College Park,
MD
20740-3835
More in Food from Genetically Engineered Plants
Consumer Info About Food from Genetically Engineered Plants
How FDA Regulates Food from Genetically Engineered Plants
Submissions on Bioengineered New Plant Varieties
Final Biotechnology Consultations
New Protein Consultations
Food Master Files & Food Additive Petitions
Biotechnology Consultation Agency Response Letter BNF 000148
Resources for You
APHIS - Regulation of Plant Biotechnology
EPA - Regulation of Plant-Incorporated Protectants
Genetically Engineered Animals
Congressional Testimony: FDAs Regulatory Program for Genetically Engineered (GE) Food
Page Last Updated: 11/19/2015
Note: If you need help accessing information in different file formats, see Instructions for Downloading Viewers and Players.
FDA
Accessibility
Careers
FDA Basics
FOIA
No FEAR Act
Site Map
Transparency
Website Policies
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
Silver Spring, MD 20993
1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)
Contact FDA
Subscribe to FDA RSS feeds
Follow FDA on Twitter
Follow FDA on Facebook
View FDA videos on YouTube
View FDA photos on Flickr
FDA Archive
Combination Products
Advisory Committees
Regulatory Information
Safety
Emergency Preparedness
International Programs
News & Events
Training & Continuing Education
Inspections & Compliance
Federal, State & Local Officials
Consumers
Health Professionals
Science & Research
Industry
Scroll back to top
Popular Content
Home
Latest Recalls
Report an Adverse Event
MedWatch Safety Alerts
News Releases
Consumer Updates
About FDA
Contact FDA
Browse by Product Area
Product Areas
back
Food
Drugs
Medical Devices
Radiation-Emitting Products
Vaccines, Blood & Biologics
Animal & Veterinary
Cosmetics
Tobacco Products